.TH cleanup\-info 8 "2007-07-18" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
cleanup\-info \- clean up the mess that bogus install\-info may have done
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cleanup\-info
.RI [ options ]
.RB [ \-\- ]
.RI [ dirname ]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cleanup\-info
is a Perl script that tries to clean up the mess that bogus
.BR install\-info (8)
may have done.
It gathers all sections with the same heading into a single one.
It tries to be smart about cases and trailing colon/spaces.
.br
Other clean-ups include removing of empty sections, and squeezing the blank
lines (in entries part only).
.sp
Order of sections is preserved (the first encountered section counts).
Order of entries within a section is preserved.
.sp
Please be \fBextremely careful\fP when using this utility - it might
not be 100% safe. cleanup\-info tries to be careful with your info dir
file, but only until it writes it. You should back the file up prior
to using this script.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-unsafe
Set some additional possibly useful options.
.br
.B "Warning: the `\-\-unsafe' option may garble an otherwise correct file!"
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR /usr/info/dir " or " <dirname>/dir
The info directory file. The lock file is named the same, with ".lock" suffix.
.
.SH BUGS
Probably many.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR install\-info (8),
.BR info (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (C) 1996 Kim-Minh Kaplan
.sp
This is free software; see the GNU General Public Licence version 2 or
later for copying conditions. There is NO WARRANTY.
