.\" dpkg manual page - deb-postinst(5)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH deb\-postinst 5 "2016-08-16" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
deb\-postinst \- package post-installation maintainer script
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
postinst
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A package can perform several post-installation actions via maintainer
scripts, by including an executable \fIpostinst\fP file in its control
archive (i.e. \fIDEBIAN/postinst\fP during package creation).
.PP
The script can be called in the following ways:
.TP
\fIpostinst\fP \fBconfigure\fP \fIold-version\fP
After the package was installed.
.TP
\fIpostinst\fP \fBtriggered\fP \fItrigger-name...\fP
After the package was triggered.
.TP
\fIold-postinst\fP \fBabort-upgrade\fP \fInew-version\fP
If \fIprerm\fP fails during upgrade or fails on failed upgrade.
.TP
\fIold-postinst\fP \fBabort-remove\fP
If \fIprerm\fP fails during removal.
.TP
\fIpostinst\fP \fBabort-deconfigure in-favour\fP \fInew-package new-version\fP
.TQ
       [ \fBremoving\fP \fIold-package old-version\fP ]
If \fIprerm\fP fails during deconfiguration of a package.
.TP
\fIpostinst\fP \fBabort-remove in-favour\fP \fInew-package new-version\fP
If \fIprerm\fP fails during replacement due to conflict.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg (1).
