.\" dpkg manual page - deb-triggers(5)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2008, 2013-2015 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2011, 2014 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH deb\-triggers 5 "%RELEASE_DATE%" "%VERSION%" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
deb\-triggers \- package triggers
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
triggers
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A package declares its relationship to some trigger(s) by including
a \fItriggers\fP file in its control archive (i.e. \fIDEBIAN/triggers\fP
during package creation).
.PP
This file contains directives, one per line. Leading and trailing whitespace
and everything after the first \fB#\fP on any line will be trimmed, and
empty lines will be ignored.
.PP
The trigger control directives currently supported are:
.TP
\fBinterest\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.TQ
\fBinterest\-await\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.TQ
\fBinterest\-noawait\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.IP
Specifies that the package is interested in the named trigger. All
triggers in which a package is interested must be listed using this
directive in the triggers control file. The \(lqnoawait\(rq variant does
not put the triggering packages in triggers\-awaited state. This should
be used when the functionality provided by the trigger is not crucial.
.TP
\fBactivate\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.TQ
\fBactivate\-await\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.TQ
\fBactivate\-noawait\fP \fItrigger-name\fP
.IP
Arranges that changes to this package's state will activate the
specified trigger. The trigger will be activated at the start of
the following operations: unpack, configure, remove (including for
the benefit of a conflicting package), purge and deconfigure.
The \(lqnoawait\(rq variant does not put the triggering packages in
triggers\-awaited state. This should be used when the functionality
provided by the trigger is not crucial.
.IP
If this package disappears during the unpacking of another package
the trigger will be activated when the disappearance is noted
towards the end of the unpack. Trigger processing, and transition
from triggers\-awaited to installed, does not cause activations.
In the case of unpack, triggers mentioned in both the old and new
versions of the package will be activated.
.PP
Unknown directives are an error which will prevent installation of the
package.
.PP
The \(lq\-noawait\(rq variants should always be favored when possible since
triggering packages are not put in triggers\-awaited state and can thus
be immediately configured without requiring the processing of the trigger.
If the triggering packages are dependencies of other upgraded packages,
it will avoid an early trigger processing run and make it possible
to run the trigger only once as one of the last steps of the upgrade.
.PP
The \(lq\-noawait\(rq variants are only supported since dpkg 1.16.1, and
will lead to errors if used with an older dpkg. It is thus recommended
to add a \(lqPre\-Depends: dpkg (>= 1.16.1)\(rq to any package that wish to use
those directives.
.PP
The \(lq\-await\(rq alias variants are only supported since dpkg 1.17.21, and
will lead to errors if used with an older dpkg. It is thus recommended
to add a \(lqPre\-Depends: dpkg (>= 1.17.21)\(rq to any package that wish to use
those directives.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg\-trigger (1),
.BR dpkg (1),
.\" FIXME: Unhardcode the pathname, and use dpkg instead of dpkg-dev.
.BR /usr/share/doc/dpkg\-dev/triggers.txt.gz .
