# dpkg manual page - deb-override(5)
#
# Copyright © 1996 Michael Shields <shields@crosslink.net>
# Copyright © 2010 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-override - Debian archive override file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<override>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

While most information about a package can be found in the control file,
some is managed centrally by the distribution czars rather than by the
maintainer in order to offer some global consistency.
This information is found in the override file.

The override file has a simple whitespace-delimited format. Comments are
allowed (denoted with a
B<#>).

=over

I<package>
I<priority>
I<section>
[I<maintainerinfo>]

=back

I<package>
is the name of the package. Entries in the override file for packages
not found in the tree of binary packages are ignored.

I<priority>
and
I<section>
correspond to the respective control fields available in the .deb. The
allowed values are specific to each distribution archive.

I<maintainerinfo>,
if present, can be either the name of a maintainer for an unconditional
override, or else
I<oldmaintainer>
B<=E<gt>>
I<newmaintainer>
to perform a substitution.

The override files used to make the official Packages lists may be found
in the
I<indices>
directory on any Debian mirror.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg-scanpackages>(1),
B<dpkg-scansources>(1),
B<apt-ftparchive>(1).
