# dpkg manual page - deb-email(7)
#
# Copyright © 2026 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-email - Debian package email address format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Näme "quoted, text" S. Surname E<lt>näme@exâmple.orgE<gt>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Email addresses as used for Debian package metadata in
binary and source packages.
These consist of a name,
followed by at least one space,
and then an email address.

The name is composed of one or more quoted (") or non-quoted parts.
These parts can contain any UTF-8 character except for
angle brackets (<>),
double quotes ("),
and
control characters.
A comma (,) is only allowed inside double quoted parts.

The email address is contained inside angle brackets (<>),
and is composed of a local part separated by an at sign (@)
followed by the domain part.

Both local and domain parts can contain any UTF-8 character except for
angle brackets (<>),
at sign (@)
double quotes ("),
space ( ),
and
control characters.

B<Note>: A domain part with a single label is allowed but will emit a warning,
as those domains are either for local hosts,
or a TLD which are not supposed to receive mail.

B<Note>: A domain part is expected to be encoded in UTF-8,
and not in IDNA/Punycode,
for readability and general handling reasons.

Multiple addresses must be separated with a comma.
