# dpkg manual page - deb-src-files(5)
#
# Copyright © 2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-src-files - Debian distribute files format

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<debian/files>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file contains the list of artifacts that are to be distributed via
the B<.changes> control file.

The I<debian/files> file has a simple whitespace-delimited format.

=over

I<filename>
I<section>
I<priority>
[
I<keyword=value...>
]

=back

I<filename>
is the name of the artifact to distribute.

I<section>
and
I<priority>
correspond to the respective control fields available in the .deb.
The allowed values are specific to each distribution archive.

I<keyword=value...>
corresponds to an optional whitespace-delimited list of attributes for this
entry.
The only currently supported keyword is B<automatic> with value
B<yes>, to mark automatically generated files.

=head1 NOTES

This file is not intended to be modified directly, please use one of
B<dpkg-gencontrol> or B<dpkg-distaddfile> to add entries to it.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg-genchanges>(1),
B<dpkg-distaddfile>(1).
