# dpkg manual page - deb-postrm(5)
#
# Copyright © 2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-postrm - package post-removal maintainer script

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<DEBIAN/postrm>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A package can perform several post-removal actions via maintainer
scripts, by including an executable I<postrm> file in its control
archive (i.e. I<DEBIAN/postrm> during package creation).

The script can be called in the following ways:

=over

=item I<postrm> B<remove>

After the package was removed.

=item I<postrm> B<purge>

After the package was purged.

=item I<old-postrm> B<upgrade> I<new-version>

After the package was upgraded.

=item I<new-postrm> B<failed-upgrade> I<old-version> I<new-version>

If the above B<upgrade> call fails.

=item I<postrm> B<disappear> I<overwriter-package> I<overwriter-version>

After all of the packages files have been replaced.

=item I<new-postrm> B<abort-install>

If I<preinst> fails during install.

=item I<new-postrm> B<abort-install> I<old-version new-version>

If I<preinst> fails during upgrade of removed package.

=item I<new-postrm> B<abort-upgrade> I<old-version new-version>

If I<preinst> fails during upgrade.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg>(1).
