# dpkg manual page - deb-md5sums(5)
#
# Copyright © 2021 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-md5sums - package MD5 file digests

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<DEBIAN/md5sums>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A package declares the MD5 digests for the package file contents by
including an I<md5sums> file in its control archive (i.e. I<DEBIAN/md5sums>
during package creation). This file is used for integrity verification
and deduplication purposes, and not for any kind of security purpose.

This file contains a list of MD5 digests (as 32 case-insensitive hexadecimal
characters) followed by two spaces (U+0020 B<SPACE>) and the absolute
pathname of a plain file, one per line.

Trailing slashes (U+002F B</>) in the pathname will be trimmed.
Neither trailing whitespace nor empty or whitespace-only lines are accepted.

If the control file does not exist in the binary package, L<dpkg(1)> will
generate the matching information at unpack time (since B<dpkg> 1.16.3).

=head1 EXAMPLE

 53c0d4afe4bc4eccb5cb234d2e06ef4d  usr/bin/dpkg
 f8da2bc74cdcad8b81c48a4f0d7bb0a8  usr/bin/dpkg-deb
 70b913132de56e95e75de504979309b4  usr/bin/dpkg-divert
 […]

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<md5sum>(1),
B<dpkg-deb>(1),
B<dpkg>(1).
