# dpkg manual page - deb-conffiles(5)
#
# Copyright © 2016-2017 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-conffiles - package conffiles

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<DEBIAN/conffiles>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A package declares its list of conffiles by including a I<conffiles> file
in its control archive (i.e. I<DEBIAN/conffiles> during package creation).

This file contains a list of files, one per line, with an optional leading
flag separated by whitespace.
The conffiles must be listed as absolute pathnames.
Trailing whitespace will be trimmed, but empty or whitespace-only lines are
not accepted.

Files without a flag should exist in the binary package, otherwise L<dpkg(1)>
will ignore them.

There is currently only one flag supported, B<remove-on-upgrade>, to mark
that a conffile needs to be removed on the next upgrade (since dpkg 1.20.6).
These files must not exist in the binary package, as both L<dpkg(1)> and
L<dpkg-deb(1)> will not accept building nor processing such binary packages.

=head1 EXAMPLE

 %CONFDIR%/alternatives/README
 %CONFDIR%/cron.daily/dpkg
 %PKGCONFDIR%/dpkg.cfg
 %CONFDIR%/logrotate.d/dpkg
 remove-on-upgrade /etc/some-old-file.conf

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg-deb>(1),
B<dpkg>(1).
