.\" dpkg manual page - deb-origin(5)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2011 Matt Kraai <kraai@ftbfs.org>
.\" Copyright © 2011 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH deb\-origin 5 "2011-11-10" "Debian Project" "Debian"
.SH NAME
deb\-origin \- Vendor-specific information files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI /etc/dpkg/origins/ filename
.SH DESCRIPTION
The files in \fB/etc/dpkg/origins\fP can provide information about
various vendors who are providing Debian packages.

They contain a number of fields, or comments when the line starts with
\(oq\fB#\fP\(cq.
Each field begins with a tag, such as \fBVendor\fP or \fBParent\fP,
followed by a colon and the body of the field. Fields are delimited
only by field tags. In other words, field text may be multiple lines
in length, but the tools will join lines when processing the body of
the field.

The file should be named according to the vendor name.
The usual convention is to name the vendor file using the vendor name
in all lowercase, but some variation is permitted.
Namely, spaces are mapped to dashes (\(oq\fB\-\fP\(cq), and the file
can have the same casing as the value in \fBVendor\fP field, or it can
be capitalized.
.SH FIELDS
.TP
.BR Vendor: " \fIvendor-name\fP (required)"
The value of this field determines the vendor name.
.TP
.BI Vendor\-URL: " vendor-url"
The value of this field determines the vendor URL.
.TP
.BI Bugs: " bug-url"
The value of this field determines the type and address of the bug
tracking system used by this vendor. It can be a mailto URL or a
debbugs URL (e.g., debbugs://bugs.debian.org/).
.TP
.BI Parent: " vendor-name"
The value of this field determines the vendor name of the vendor that
this vendor derives from.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
Vendor: Debian
Vendor\-URL: https://www.debian.org/
Bugs: debbugs://bugs.debian.org
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg\-vendor (1)
