# dpkg manual page - deb-postinst(5)
#
# Copyright © 2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-postinst - package post-installation maintainer script

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<DEBIAN/postinst>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A package can perform several post-installation actions via maintainer
scripts, by including an executable I<postinst> file in its control
archive (i.e. I<DEBIAN/postinst> during package creation).

The script can be called in the following ways:

=over

=item I<postinst> B<configure> I<old-version>

After the package was installed.

=item I<postinst> B<triggered> "I<trigger-name...>"

After the package was triggered.
The list of space-separated I<trigger-name>s is passed as the second
argument.

=item I<old-postinst> B<abort-upgrade> I<new-version>

If I<prerm> fails during upgrade or fails on failed upgrade.

=item I<old-postinst> B<abort-remove>

If I<prerm> fails during removal.

=item I<postinst> B<abort-deconfigure in-favour> I<new-package new-version>

=item S<       >[ B<removing> I<old-package old-version> ]

If I<prerm> fails during deconfiguration of a package.

=item I<postinst> B<abort-remove in-favour> I<new-package new-version>

If I<prerm> fails during replacement due to conflict.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg>(1).
