.\" dpkg manual page - deb-src-files(5)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH deb\-src\-files 5 "%RELEASE_DATE%" "%VERSION%" "dpkg suite"
.nh
.SH NAME
deb\-src\-files \- Debian distribute files format
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
debian/files
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This file contains the list of artifacts that are to be distributed via
the \fB.changes\fP control file.
.PP
The \fIdebian/files\fP file has a simple whitespace-delimited format.
.PP
.in +5
.I filename
.I section
.I priority
.in -5
.PP
.I filename
is the name of the artifact to distribute.
.PP
.I section
and
.I priority
correspond to the respective control fields available in the .deb.
The allowed values are specific to each distribution archive.
.
.SH NOTES
This file is not intended to be modified directly, please use one of
\fBdpkg\-gencontrol\fP or \fBdpkg\-distaddfile\fP to add entries to it.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
.BR dpkg\-genchanges (1),
.BR dpkg\-distaddfile (1).
