# dpkg manual page - deb-origin(5)
#
# Copyright © 2011 Matt Kraai <kraai@ftbfs.org>
# Copyright © 2011 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

deb-origin - Vendor-specific information files

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins/>I<filename>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The files in B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins> can provide information about
various vendors who are providing Debian packages.

They contain a number of fields, or comments when the line starts with
‘B<#>’.
Each field begins with a tag, such as B<Vendor> or B<Parent>,
followed by a colon and the body of the field. Fields are delimited
only by field tags. In other words, field text may be multiple lines
in length, but the tools will join lines when processing the body of
the field.

The file should be named according to the vendor name.
The usual convention is to name the vendor file using the vendor name
in all lowercase, but some variation is permitted.

Namely (since dpkg 1.21.10), first, non-alphanumeric characters
(‘B<[^A-Za-z0-9]>’) are mapped to dashes (‘B<->’), then the resulting
name will be tried in sequence by lower-casing it, keeping it as is,
lower-casing then capitalizing it (that is upper-casing the first character),
and only capitalizing it.

In addition, for historical and backwards compatibility, the name will
be tried keeping it as is without non-alphanumeric characters remapping,
then the resulting name will be tried in sequence by lower-casing it,
keeping it as is, lower-casing then capitalizing it, and only capitalizing it.
And finally the name will be tried by remapping spaces to dashes (‘B<->’),
then the resulting name will be tried in sequence by lower-casing it,
keeping it as is, lower-casing then capitalizing it, and only capitalizing it.

But these backwards compatible module lookups will be removed during the
dpkg 1.22.x release cycle.

=head1 FIELDS

=over

=item B<Vendor:> I<vendor-name> (required)

The value of this field determines the vendor name.

=item B<Vendor-URL:> I<vendor-url>

The value of this field determines the vendor URL.

=item B<Bugs:> I<bug-url>

The value of this field determines the type and address of the bug
tracking system used by this vendor. It can be a mailto URL or a
debbugs URL (e.g., debbugs://bugs.debian.org/).

=item B<Parent:> I<vendor-name>

The value of this field determines the vendor name of the vendor that
this vendor derives from.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLE

 Vendor: Debian
 Vendor-URL: https://www.debian.org/
 Bugs: debbugs://bugs.debian.org

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<dpkg-vendor>(1)
