.TH deb\-triggers 5 "2009-03-15" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
deb\-triggers \- package triggers
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
triggers
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A package declares its relationship to some trigger(s) by including
a \fItriggers\fP file in its control archive (i.e. \fIDEBIAN/triggers\fP
during package creation).
.PP
This file contains directives, one per line. Leading and trailing whitespace
and everything after the first \fB#\fP on any line will be trimmed, and
empty lines will be ignored.
.PP
The trigger control directives currently supported are:
.PP
.in +5
.B interest
.I trigger-name
.PP
.in +5
Specifies that the package is interested in the named trigger. All
triggers in which a package is interested must be listed using this
directive in the triggers control file.
.PP
.in +5
.B activate
.I trigger-name
.PP
.in +5
Arranges that changes to this package's state will activate the
specified trigger. The trigger will be activated at the start of
the following operations: unpack, configure, remove (including for
the benefit of a conflicting package), purge and deconfigure.
.PP
.in +5
If this package disappears during the unpacking of another package
the trigger will be activated when the disappearance is noted
towards the end of the unpack. Trigger processing, and transition
from triggers-awaited to installed, does not cause activations.
In the case of unpack, triggers mentioned in both the old and new
versions of the package will be activated.
.PP
Unknown directives are an error which will prevent installation of the
package.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg\-trigger (1),
.BR dpkg (1),
.BR /usr/share/doc/dpkg-dev/triggers.txt.gz .
