.\" dpkg manual page - dpkg-genbuildinfo(1)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 1995-1996 Ian Jackson <ian@chiark.chu.cam.ac.uk>
.\" Copyright © 2000 Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2008-2010 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2006-2016 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2015 Jérémy Bobbio <lunar@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH dpkg\-genbuildinfo 1 "%RELEASE_DATE%" "%VERSION%" "dpkg suite"
.nh
.SH NAME
dpkg\-genbuildinfo \- generate Debian .buildinfo files
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-genbuildinfo
.RI [ option ...]
.br
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dpkg\-genbuildinfo
reads information from an unpacked and built Debian source tree and
from the files it has generated and generates a Debian control
file describing the build environment and the build artifacts
.RB ( .buildinfo " file)."
.P
This command was introduced in dpkg 1.18.11.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-build= type
Specifies the build \fItype\fP from a comma-separated list of components.

The allowed values are:
.RS
.TP
.B any
Generate build information including unqualified build dependencies
(\fBBuild\-Depends\fP) and architecture specific build dependencies
(\fBBuild\-Depends\-Arch\fP).
.TP
.B all
Generate build information including unqualified build dependencies
(\fBBuild\-Depends\fP) and architecture independent build dependencies
(\fBBuild\-Depends\-Indep\fP).
.TP
.B source
Effectively ignored; generate build information with just the unqualified
build dependencies (\fBBuild\-Depends\fP).
.TP
.B binary
Generate build information with all three types of build dependencies.
This is an alias for \fBany,all\fP.
.TP
.B full
Generate build information with all three types of build dependencies.
This is an alias for \fBany,all,source\fP, and the same as the default
case when no build option is specified.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-c controlfile
Specifies the main source control file to read information from. The
default is
.BR debian/control .
.TP
.BI \-l changelog-file
Specifies the changelog file to read information from. The
default is
.BR debian/changelog .
.TP
.BI \-f files-list-file
Specifies where is the list of files that have been produced by the build,
rather than using
.BR debian/files .
.TP
.BI \-F changelog-format
Specifies the format of the changelog. See \fBdpkg\-parsechangelog\fP(1)
for information about alternative formats.
.TP
.BR \-O [\fIfilename\fP]
Print the buildinfo file to standard output (or \fIfilename\fP if specified)
rather than to
.IB dir / source-name _ source-version _ arch .buildinfo
(where \fIdir\fP is \fB..\fP by default or \fIupload-files-dir\fP
if \fB\-u\fP was used).
.TP
.BI \-u upload-files-dir
Look for the files to be uploaded in
.I upload-files-dir
rather than
.B ..
(\fBdpkg\-genbuildinfo\fP needs to find these files so that it can include
their sizes and checksums in the \fB.buildinfo\fP file).
.TP
.BI \-\-always\-include\-path
By default, the \fBBuild\-Path\fR field will only be written if the current
directory starts with a whitelisted pattern.

On Debian and derivatives the pattern matches on \fB/build/\fR at the start
of the pathname.

Specify this option to always write a \fBBuild\-Path\fR field when generating
the \fB.buildinfo\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-admindir= dir
Change the location of the \fBdpkg\fR database. The default location is
\fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP.
.TP
.B \-q
.B dpkg\-genbuildinfo
might produce informative messages on standard error.
.B \-q
suppresses these messages.
.TP
.BR \-? ", " \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DEB_BUILD_OPTIONS
This variable can be used to enable or disable various features that affect
the information included in the .buildinfo file, via the \fBbuildinfo\fP
option (since dpkg 1.18.19).
This option contains a comma-separated list of features, prefixed with the
‘\fB+\fP’ or ‘\fB\-\fP’ modifiers, to denote whether to enable or disable
them.
The special feature “\fBall\fP” can be used to enable or disable all other
features.
The feature “\fBpath\fP” controls whether to unconditionally include the
\fBBuild\-Path\fP field.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B debian/files
The list of generated files.
.B dpkg\-genbuildinfo
reads the data here when producing a
.B .buildinfo
file.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR deb-buildinfo (5).
