.\" dpkg manual page - dpkg-distaddfile(1)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 1995-1996 Ian Jackson <ijackson@chiark.greenend.org.uk>
.\" Copyright © 2000 Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH dpkg\-distaddfile 1 "2012-05-04" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-distaddfile \- add entries to debian/files
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-distaddfile
.RI [ option ...] " filename section priority"
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dpkg\-distaddfile
adds an entry for a named file to
.BR debian/files .

It takes three non-option arguments, the filename and the section and
priority for the
.B .changes
file.

The filename should be specified relative to the directory where
.B dpkg\-genchanges
will expect to find the files, usually
.BR .. ,
rather than being a pathname relative to the current directory when
.B dpkg\-distaddfile
is run.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-f files-list-file
Read or write the list of files to be uploaded here, rather than using
.BR debian/files .
.TP
.BR \-? ", " \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B debian/files
The list of generated files which are part of the upload being
prepared.
.B dpkg\-distaddfile
can be used to add additional files.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
.nh
.BR deb\-src\-files (5).
