# dpkg manual page - dpkg-build-api(7)
#
# Copyright © 2021-2023 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

dpkg-build-api - source package dpkg build API level

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 Build-Depends:
  dpkg-build-api (= 1),

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The source package dpkg build API level, defines a versioned interface for
source packages, where each API level provides specific behaviors and
guarantees.

These interfaces can then be adopted by packages in a gradual way,
and phased out more easily than with global behavior changes.

The declaration of this API level is done through build-dependencies, in
one of B<Build-Depends>, B<Build-Depends-Indep> or B<Build-Depends-Arch>,
or via the environment variable B<DPKG_BUILD_API>, which will override these
if both are present, and might emit a warning in case they are different.

=head1 API LEVELS

=over

=item v2

This level is still under development, and cannot be declared via
build-dependencies.

=item v1

This is the recommended level.
Since dpkg 1.22.0.

Changes from v0 are:

=over

=item *

B<dpkg-shlibdeps> no longer uses the B<LD_LIBRARY_PATH> environment variable.
The B<-l> option should be used instead.

=item *

B<dpkg-buildpackage> defaults to B<Rules-Requires-Root> to B<no>.
To restore the B<v0> behavior B<Rules-Requires-Root> should be set to
B<binary-targets>.

=item *

B<dpkg-buildpackage> requires all required F<debian/rules> targets.
That is B<clean>, B<build>, B<build-indep>, B<build-arch>,
B<binary-indep> and B<binary-arch>.

=item *

B<vendor.mk> defaults to using B<dpkg_vendor_derives_from_v1> for the
B<dpkg_vendor_derives_from> macro.
To restore the B<v0> behavior set B<dpkg_vendor_derives_from> to
B<dpkg_vendor_derives_from_v0>.

=item *

B<default.mk> defaults to including B<buildtools.mk>.

=back

=item v0

This is the current global level, equivalent to not specifying one.
The interfaces and behaviors provided are subject to the normal global
interface updates, which tend to require longer deprecation cycles and/or
coordinated transitions.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<deb-src-control>(5).
