# dpkg manual page - dpkg-fsys-usrunmess(8)
#
# Copyright © 2020-2021 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

dpkg-fsys-usrunmess - undoes the merged-/usr-via-aliased-dirs mess

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dpkg-fsys-usrunmess> [B<option>...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dpkg-fsys-usrunmess> is a tool to fix up filesystems that have been
installed anew with recent installers with unfortunate defaults or
migrated to the broken merged /usr via aliased directories layout,
which is B<not> supported by dpkg. See the dpkg FAQ.

The program will perform the following overall actions:

=over

=item *

Check whether the system needs to be switched, otherwise do nothing,

=item *

Check for dpkg database consistency and otherwise abort.

=item *

Generate and install a regression prevention package.

=item *

Get the list of files and alternatives that need to be restored.

=item *

Create a shadow hierarchy under F</.usrunmess>, by creating the directories
symlinks or hardlinking or copying the files as needed.

=item *

Prompt for confirmation before proceeding, if requested on the command-line.

=item *

Lock the dpkg database.

=item *

Mark all packages as half-configured to force running maintainer scripts
that might need to recreate files.

=item *

Replace the aliased directories with the shadow ones, by creating a backup
of the old symlinked directories and renaming the shadow ones over.

=item *

Relabel MAC information for directories and symlinks if necessary.

=item *

Remove backup symlinks.

=item *

Remove old moved objects, but defer directory removal.

=item *

Remove old deferred directories that are not referenced by dpkg-query.

=item *

Remove shadow root directory.

=item *

Register a B<policy-rc.d> to disallow service actions, which means that
services might need to be restarted afterwards, ideally via a reboot.

=item *

Reconfigure all packages.

=item *

Unregister the B<policy-rc.d> and restore the alternatives state.

=back

B<Note>: When running the program from some shells such as L<bash(1)> or
L<zsh(1)>, after executing it, you might need to request the shell to
forget all remembered executable locations with for example C<hash -r>.

B<Note>: Some directories might linger after the migration in case they
contain untracked files. A list is printed once the script has finished
for further investigation.

B<Warning>: Note that this operation has the potential to render the system
unusable or broken in case of a sudden crash or reboot, unexpected state of
the system, or possible bugs in the script. Be prepared with recovery media
and consider doing backups beforehand.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-p>, B<--prompt>

Prompt at the time of no return, so that the debug output or the shadow
hierarchy can be evaluated before proceeding.

=item B<-n>, B<--no-act>

=item B<--dry-run>

This option enables the dry-run mode, where no destructive action takes place,
only the preparatory part.

=item B<-?>, B<--help>

Show the usage message and exit.

=item B<--version>

Show the version and exit.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<DPKG_USRUNMESS_NOACT>

This setting defines whether to enable dry-run mode.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<https://wiki.debian.org/Teams/Dpkg/FAQ#Q:_Does_dpkg_support_merged-.2Fusr-via-aliased-dirs.3F>.
