.\" dpkg manual page - dpkg-buildpackage(1)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 1995-1996 Ian Jackson
.\" Copyright © 2000 Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2007-2008 Frank Lichtenheld <djpig@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2008-2015 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2008-2012 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH dpkg\-buildpackage 1 "2013-12-12" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-buildpackage \- build binary or source packages from sources
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-buildpackage
.RI [ option ...]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dpkg\-buildpackage
is a program that automates the process of building a Debian package. It
consists of the following steps:
.IP \fB1.\fP 3
It prepares the build environment by setting various environment
variables (see \fBENVIRONMENT\fP), runs the \fBinit\fP hook, and calls
\fBdpkg\-source \-\-before\-build\fP (unless \fB\-T\fP or \fB\-\-target\fP
has been used).
.IP \fB2.\fP 3
It checks that the build-dependencies and build-conflicts
are satisfied (unless \fB\-d\fP is specified).
.IP \fB3.\fP 3
If a specific target has been selected with the \fB\-T\fP or \fB\-\-target\fP
option, it calls that target and stops here. Otherwise it runs the
\fBpreclean\fP hook and calls \fBfakeroot debian/rules clean\fP to
clean the build-tree (unless \fB\-nc\fP is specified).
.IP \fB4.\fP 3
It runs the \fBsource\fP hook and calls \fBdpkg\-source \-b\fP to generate
the source package (unless a binary\-only build has been requested with
\fB\-b\fP, \fB\-B\fP or \fB\-A\fP).
.IP \fB5.\fP 3
It runs the \fBbuild\fP hook and calls \fBdebian/rules\fP \fIbuild-target\fP,
then runs the \fBbinary\fP hook followed by \fBfakeroot debian/rules\fP
\fIbinary-target\fP (unless a source-only build has been requested with
\fB\-S\fP). Note that \fIbuild-target\fR and \fIbinary-target\fP are either
\fBbuild\fP and \fBbinary\fP (default case, or if \fB\-b\fP is specified),
or \fBbuild\-arch\fP and \fBbinary\-arch\fP (if \fB\-B\fP or \fB\-G\fP are
specified), or \fBbuild\-indep\fP and \fBbinary\-indep\fP (if \fB\-A\fP
or \fB\-g\fP are specified).
.IP \fB6.\fP 3
It runs the \fBchanges\fP hook and calls \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP to
generate a \fB.changes\fP file.
Many \fBdpkg\-buildpackage\fP options are forwarded to
\fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.IP \fB7.\fP 3
It runs the \fBpostclean\fP hook and if \fB\-tc\fP is specified, it will
call \fBfakeroot debian/rules clean\fP again.
.IP \fB8.\fP 3
It calls \fBdpkg\-source \-\-after\-build\fP.
.IP \fB9.\fP 3
It runs the \fBcheck\fP hook and calls a package checker for the
\fB.changes\fP file (if a command is specified in \fBDEB_CHECK_COMMAND\fP or
with \fB\-\-check\-command\fP).
.IP \fB10.\fP 3
It runs the \fBsign\fP hook and calls \fBgpg2\fP or \fBgpg\fP to sign
the \fB.dsc\fP file (if any, unless \fB\-us\fP is specified or on UNRELEASED
builds), and the \fB.changes\fP file (unless \fB\-uc\fP is specified or on
UNRELEASED builds).
.IP \fB11.\fP 3
It runs the \fBdone\fP hook.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-g
Specifies a build limited to source and architecture independent packages
(since dpkg 1.17.11).
Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.TP
.B \-G
Specifies a build limited to source and architecture specific packages
(since dpkg 1.17.11).
Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.TP
.B \-b
Specifies a binary-only build, no source files are to be built and/or
distributed. Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.TP
.B \-B
Specifies a binary-only build, limited to architecture dependent packages.
Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.TP
.B \-A
Specifies a binary-only build, limited to architecture independent
packages. Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
.TP
.B \-S
Specifies a source-only build, no binary packages need to be made.
Passed to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP.
Note: if what you want is simply to (re-)build the source package, using
\fBdpkg\-source\fP is always better as it does not require any build
dependencies to be installed to be able to call the \fBclean\fP target.
.TP
.B \-F
Specifies a normal full build, binary and source packages will be built
(since dpkg 1.15.8).
This is the same as the default case when no build option is specified.
.TP
.BI \-\-target= target
.TQ
.BI "\-\-target " target
.TQ
.BI \-T target
Calls \fBdebian/rules\fP \fItarget\fP after having setup the build
environment and stops the package build process here (since dpkg 1.15.0).
If \fB\-\-as\-root\fP is also given, then the command is executed
as root (see \fB\-r\fP). Note that official targets that are required to
be run as root by the Debian policy do not need this option.
.TP
.B \-\-as\-root
Only meaningful together with \fB\-\-target\fP (since dpkg 1.15.0).
Requires that the target be run with root rights.
.TP
.B \-si
.TQ
.B \-sa
.TQ
.B \-sd
.TQ
.BI \-v version
.TQ
.BI \-C changes-description
.TQ
.BI \-m maintainer-address
.TQ
.BI \-e maintainer-address
Passed unchanged to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP. See its manual page.
.TP
.BR \-a ", " \-\-host\-arch " \fIarchitecture\fP"
Specify the Debian architecture we build for (long option since dpkg 1.17.17).
The architecture of the
machine we build on is determined automatically, and is also the default
for the host machine.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-host\-type " \fIgnu-system-type\fP"
Specify the GNU system type we build for (long option since dpkg 1.17.17).
It can be used in place
of \-\-host\-arch or as a complement to override the default GNU system type
of the host Debian architecture.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-arch " \fIarchitecture\fP"
Specify the Debian architecture the binaries built will build for
(since dpkg 1.17.17).
The default value is the host machine.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-type " \fIgnu-system-type\fP"
Specify the GNU system type the binaries built will build for
(since dpkg 1.17.17).
It can be
used in place of \-\-target\-arch or as a complement to override the
default GNU system type of the target Debian architecture.
.TP
.BR \-P \fIprofile\fP[ , ...]
Specify the profile(s) we build, as a comma-separated list (since dpkg 1.17.2).
The default
behavior is to build for no specific profile. Also sets them (as a space
separated list) as the \fBDEB_BUILD_PROFILES\fP environment variable which
allows, for example, \fBdebian/rules\fP files to use this information for
conditional builds.
.TP
.BR \-j [\fIjobs\fP|\fBauto\fP]
Number of jobs allowed to be run simultaneously, number of jobs matching
the number of online processors if \fBauto\fP is specified
(since dpkg 1.17.10), or unlimited number if \fIjobs\fP is not specified,
equivalent to the
.BR make (1)
option of the same name (since dpkg 1.14.7).
Will add itself to the \fB\%MAKEFLAGS\fP
environment variable, which should cause all subsequent make
invocations to inherit the option, thus forcing the parallel setting on
the packaging (and possibly the upstream build system if that uses make)
regardless of their support for parallel builds, which might cause build
failures.
Also adds \fBparallel=\fP\fIjobs\fP or
\fBparallel\fP to the \fBDEB_BUILD_OPTIONS\fP environment variable which
allows debian/rules files to use this information for their own purposes.
The \fB\-j\fP value will override the \fBparallel=\fP\fIjobs\fP or
\fBparallel\fP option in the \fBDEB_BUILD_OPTIONS\fP environment variable.
Note that the \fBauto\fP value will get replaced by the actual number of
currently active processors, and as such will not get propagated to any
child process. If the number of online processors cannot be inferred then
the code will fallback to using an unlimited number.
.TP
.B \-D
Check build dependencies and conflicts; abort if unsatisfied. This is the
default behavior.
.TP
.B \-d
Do not check build dependencies and conflicts.
.TP
.B \-nc
Do not clean the source tree (implies \fB\-b\fP if nothing else has been
selected among \fB\-F\fP, \fB\-g\fP, \fB\-G\fP, \fB\-B\fP, \fB\-A\fP
or \fB\-S\fP).
.TP
.B \-tc
Clean the source tree (using
.I gain-root-command
.BR "debian/rules clean" )
after the package has been built.
.TP
.BI \-r gain-root-command
When
.B dpkg\-buildpackage
needs to execute part of the build process as root, it prefixes the
command it executes with
.I gain-root-command
if one has been specified. Otherwise, if none has been specified,
\fBfakeroot\fP will be used by default, if the command is present.
.I gain-root-command
should start with the name of a program on the
.B PATH
and will get as arguments the name of the real command to run and the
arguments it should take.
.I gain-root-command
can include parameters (they must be space-separated) but no shell
metacharacters.
.I gain-root-command
might typically be
.BR fakeroot ", " sudo ", " super " or " really .
.B su
is not suitable, since it can only invoke the user's shell with
.B \-c
instead of passing arguments individually to the command to be run.
.TP
.BI \-R rules-file
Building a Debian package usually involves invoking
.B debian/rules
as a command with several standard parameters (since dpkg 1.14.17).
With this option it's
possible to use another program invocation to build the package (it can
include space separated parameters).
Alternatively it can be used to execute the standard rules file with
another make program (for example by using
.B /usr/local/bin/make \-f debian/rules
as \fIrules-file\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-check\-command= check-command
Command used to check the \fB.changes\fP file itself and any artifact built
referenced in the file (since dpkg 1.17.6).
The command should take the \fB.changes\fP pathname
as an argument. This command will usually be \fBlintian\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-check\-option= opt
Pass option \fIopt\fP to the \fIcheck-command\fP specified with
\fBDEB_CHECK_COMMAND\fP or \fB\-\-check\-command\fP (since dpkg 1.17.6).
Can be used multiple times.
.TP
.BI \-\-hook\- hook-name = hook-command
Set the specified shell code \fIhook-command\fP as the hook \fIhook-name\fP,
which will run at the times specified in the run steps (since dpkg 1.17.6).
The hooks will
always be executed even if the following action is not performed (except
for the \fBbinary\fP hook).

Note: Hooks can affect the build process, and cause build failures if
their commands fail, so watch out for unintended consequences.

The current \fIhook-name\fP supported are:

.B init preclean source build binary changes postclean check sign done

The \fIhook-command\fP supports the following substitution format string,
which will get applied to it before execution:

.RS
.TP
.B %%
A single % character.
.TP
.B %a
A boolean value (0 or 1), representing whether the following action is
being performed.
.TP
.B %p
The source package name.
.TP
.B %v
The source package version.
.TP
.B %s
The source package version (without the epoch).
.TP
.B %u
The upstream version.
.RE
.TP
.BI \-p sign-command
When \fBdpkg\-buildpackage\fP needs to execute GPG to sign a source
control (\fB.dsc\fP) file or a \fB.changes\fP file it will run
\fIsign-command\fP (searching the \fBPATH\fP if necessary) instead of
\fBgpg2\fP or \fBgpg\fP. \fIsign-command\fP will get all the arguments
that \fBgpg2\fP or \fBgpg\fP would have gotten. \fIsign-command\fP
should not contain spaces or any other shell metacharacters.
.TP
.BI \-k key-id
Specify a key-ID to use when signing packages.
.TP
.BR \-us
Do not sign the source package.
.TP
.BR \-uc
Do not sign the \fB.changes\fP file.
.TP
.BR \-\-force\-sign
Force the signing of the resulting files (since dpkg 1.17.0),
regardless of \fB\-us\fP or \fB\-uc\fP or other internal heuristics.
.TP
.BR \-i [\fIregex\fP]
.TQ
.BR \-I [\fIpattern\fP]
.TQ
.BR \-s [ nsAkurKUR ]
.TQ
.BR \-z ", " \-Z
Passed unchanged to \fBdpkg\-source\fP. See its manual page.
.TP
.BI \-\-source\-option= opt
Pass option \fIopt\fP to \fBdpkg\-source\fP (since dpkg 1.15.6).
Can be used multiple times.
.TP
.BI \-\-changes\-option= opt
Pass option \fIopt\fP to \fBdpkg\-genchanges\fP (since dpkg 1.15.6).
Can be used multiple times.
.TP
.BI \-\-admindir= dir
.TQ
.BI "\-\-admindir " dir
Change the location of the \fBdpkg\fR database (since dpkg 1.14.0).
The default location is \fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP.
.TP
.BR \-? ", " \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DEB_CHECK_COMMAND
If set, it will be used as the command to check the \fB.changes\fP file
(since dpkg 1.17.6).
Overridden by the \fB\-\-check\-command\fP option.
.TP
.B DEB_SIGN_KEYID
If set, it will be used to sign the \fB.changes\fP and \fB.dsc\fP files
(since dpkg 1.17.2).
Overridden by the \fB\-k\fP option.
.TP
.B DEB_BUILD_OPTIONS
If set, and containing \fBnocheck\fP the \fBDEB_CHECK_COMMAND\fP variable
will be ignored.
.TP
.B DEB_BUILD_PROFILES
If set, it will be used as the active build profile(s) for the package
being built.
It is a space separated list of profile names (since dpkg 1.17.2).
Overridden by the \fB\-P\fP option.

.SS Reliance on exported environment flags
Even if \fBdpkg\-buildpackage\fP exports some variables, \fBdebian/rules\fP
should not rely on their presence and should instead use the
respective interface to retrieve the needed values.
.SS Variables set by dpkg\-architecture
\fBdpkg\-architecture\fP is called with the \fB\-a\fP and \fB\-t\fP
parameters forwarded. Any variable that is output by its \fB\-s\fP
option is integrated in the build environment.
.
.SH NOTES
.SS Compiler flags are no longer exported
Between dpkg 1.14.17 and 1.16.1, \fBdpkg\-buildpackage\fP
exported compiler flags (\fBCFLAGS\fP, \fBCXXFLAGS\fP, \fBFFLAGS\fP,
\fBCPPFLAGS\fP and \fBLDFLAGS\fP) with values as returned
by \fBdpkg\-buildflags\fP. This is no longer the case.
.SS Default build targets
\fBdpkg\-buildpackage\fP is using the \fBbuild\-arch\fP and
\fBbuild\-indep\fP targets since dpkg 1.16.2. Those targets are thus
mandatory. But to avoid breakages of existing packages, and ease
the transition, it will fallback to using the \fBbuild\fP target
if \fBmake \-f debian/rules \-qn\fP \fIbuild-target\fP returns 2 as
exit code.
.SH BUGS
It should be possible to specify spaces and shell metacharacters
and initial arguments for
.IR gain-root-command " and " sign-command .
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.ad l
.nh
.BR dpkg\-source (1),
.BR dpkg\-architecture (1),
.BR dpkg\-buildflags (1),
.BR dpkg\-genchanges (1),
.BR fakeroot (1),
.BR lintian (1),
.BR gpg2 (1),
.BR gpg (1).
