# dpkg manual page - dpkg-distaddfile(1)
#
# Copyright © 1995-1996 Ian Jackson <ijackson@chiark.greenend.org.uk>
# Copyright © 2000 Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

dpkg-distaddfile - add entries to debian/files

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dpkg-distaddfile>
[I<option>...] I<filename section priority>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dpkg-distaddfile>
adds an entry for a named file to
B<debian/files>.

It takes three non-option arguments, the filename and the section and
priority for the
B<.changes>
file.

The filename should be specified relative to the directory where
B<dpkg-genchanges>
will expect to find the files, usually
B<..>,
rather than being a pathname relative to the current directory when
B<dpkg-distaddfile>
is run.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-f>I<files-list-file>

Read or write the list of files to be uploaded here, rather than using
B<debian/files>.

=item B<-?>, B<--help>

Show the usage message and exit.

=item B<--version>

Show the version and exit.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<DPKG_COLORS>

Sets the color mode (since dpkg 1.18.5).
The currently accepted values are: B<auto> (default), B<always> and
B<never>.

=item B<DPKG_NLS>

If set, it will be used to decide whether to activate Native Language Support,
also known as internationalization (or i18n) support (since dpkg 1.19.0).
The accepted values are: B<0> and B<1> (default).

=back

=head1 FILES

=over

=item B<debian/files>

The list of generated files which are part of the upload being
prepared.
B<dpkg-distaddfile>
can be used to add additional files.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<deb-src-files>(5).
