# dpkg manual page - dpkg-vendor(1)
#
# Copyright © 2009 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

dpkg-vendor - queries information about distribution vendors

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<dpkg-vendor>
[I<option>...] I<command>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<dpkg-vendor> is a tool to query information about vendors listed in
B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins>.
B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins/default> contains
information about the current vendor.

The origin files provide metadata about specific vendors,
such as their URL or where to file bug reports,
and are usually used both to determine the behavior of tools and
resulting contents during package builds targeting a specific vendor,
and to describe the provenance of packages.

Packages can explicitly declare their vendor by including an B<Origin> field,
otherwise the vendor for a package without such field is assumed to be the
one pointed to by the F<default> origin symbolic link.

The F<default> symbolic link is also used to denote the origin of
the current installation managed by B<dpkg>,
be that a full distribution or an overlay on top of an existing base
system that contains either no packaging system or a native one.

This program was introduced in dpkg 1.15.1.

=head1 COMMANDS

=over

=item B<--is> I<vendor>

Exits with B<0> if the current vendor is I<vendor>.
Otherwise exits
with B<1>.

=item B<--derives-from> I<vendor>

Exits with B<0> if the current vendor distribution is a derivative of
I<vendor>, otherwise exits with B<1>.
It uses the B<Parent> field to browse all ancestors of the current vendor.

=item B<--query> I<field>

Print on standard output the value of the vendor-specific I<field> for
the current vendor.

=item B<--help>

Show the usage message and exit.

=item B<--version>

Show the version and exit.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<--vendor> I<vendor>

Assumes the current vendor is I<vendor> instead of discovering it
with the B<DEB_VENDOR> environment variable or
B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins/default>.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over

=item B<DEB_VENDOR>

This setting defines the current vendor.
If not set, it will discover the
current vendor by reading B<%PKGCONFDIR%/origins/default>.

=item B<DPKG_COLORS>

Sets the color mode (since dpkg 1.18.5).
The currently accepted values are: B<auto> (default), B<always> and
B<never>.

=item B<DPKG_NLS>

If set, it will be used to decide whether to activate Native Language Support,
also known as internationalization (or i18n) support (since dpkg 1.19.0).
The accepted values are: B<0> and B<1> (default).

=back

=head1 FILES

=head2 Packaging support

=over

=item B<%PKGDATADIR%/vendor.mk>

Makefile snippet that sets the current vendor and its parent into variables,
and provides make macros to check for derivatives (since dpkg 1.16.1).

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<deb-origin(5)>.
