.TH dpkg\-trigger 1 "2009-03-15" "Debian Project" "dpkg suite"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-trigger \- a package trigger utility
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-trigger
.RI [ option "...] " trigger-name
.br
.B dpkg\-trigger
.RI [ option "...] " command
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdpkg\-trigger\fP is a tool to explicitly activate triggers and check
for its support on the running \fBdpkg\fP.
.PP
This can be used by maintainer scripts in complex and conditional
situations where the file triggers, or the declarative \fBactivate\fP
triggers control file directive, are insufficiently rich. It can also
be used for testing and by system administrators (but note that the
triggers won't actually be run by \fBdpkg\-trigger\fP).
.PP
Unrecognised trigger name syntaxes are an error for \fBdpkg\-trigger\fP.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BR \-\-check\-supported
Check if the running \fBdpkg\fP supports triggers (usually called from a
postinst). Will exit 0 if a triggers-capable \fBdpkg\fP has run, or 1 with
an error message to stderr if not. Normally, however, it is better just to
activate the desired trigger with \fBdpkg\-trigger\fP.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-admindir= dir
Change the location of the \fBdpkg\fR database. The default location is
\fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP.
.TP
.BR \-\-by\-package=\fIpackage\fR
Override trigger awaiter (normally set by \fBdpkg\fP through the
DPKG_MAINTSCRIPT_PACKAGE environment variable of the maintainer scripts,
naming the package to which the script belongs, and this will be used
by default).
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-await
This option arranges that the calling package T (if any) need not await
the processing of this trigger; the interested package(s) I, will not be
added to T's trigger processing awaited list and T's status is unchanged.
T may be considered installed even though I may not yet have processed
the trigger.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-act
Just test, do not actually change anything.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DPKG_ADMINDIR
If set and the \fB\-\-admindir\fP option has not been specified, it will
be used as the dpkg data directory.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg "(1), " deb-triggers "(5), " /usr/share/doc/dpkg-dev/triggers.txt.gz .

