.\" dpkg manual page - dpkg-vendor(1)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2009 Raphaël Hertzog <hertzog@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH dpkg\-vendor 1 "2011-11-10" "Debian Project" "dpkg suite"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-vendor \- queries information about distribution vendors
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-vendor
.RI [ option "...] " command
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdpkg\-vendor\fP is a tool to query information about vendors listed in
\fB/etc/dpkg/origins\fP. \fB/etc/dpkg/origins/default\fP contains
information about the current vendor.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI \-\-is " vendor"
Exits with \fB0\fP if the current vendor is \fIvendor\fP. Otherwise exits
with \fB1\fP.
.TP
.BI \-\-derives\-from " vendor"
Exits with \fB0\fP if the current vendor distribution is a derivative of
\fIvendor\fP, otherwise exits with \fB1\fP.
It uses the \fBParent\fP field to browse all ancestors of the current vendor.
.TP
.BI \-\-query " field"
Print on standard output the value of the vendor-specific \fIfield\fP for
the current vendor.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-vendor " vendor"
Assumes the current vendor is \fIvendor\fP instead of discovering it
with the \fBDEB_VENDOR\fP environment variable or
\fB/etc/dpkg/origins/default\fP.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBDEB_VENDOR\fP
This setting defines the current vendor. If not set, it will discover the
current vendor by reading \fB/etc/dpkg/origins/default\fP.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR deb\-origin (5).
