.\" dpkg manual page - dpkg-statoverride(1)
.\"
.\" Copyright © 2000-2001 Wichert Akkerman <wakkerma@debian.org>
.\" Copyright © 2009-2011, 2013, 2015 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
.
.TH dpkg\-statoverride 1 "%RELEASE_DATE%" "%VERSION%" "dpkg suite"
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
dpkg\-statoverride \- override ownership and mode of files
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-statoverride
.RI [ option "...] " command
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
“\fBstat overrides\fR” are a way to tell
.BR dpkg (1)
to use a different owner
or mode for a path when a package is installed (this applies to any
filesystem object that
.B dpkg
handles, including directories, devices, etc.). This can be used to
force programs that are normally setuid to be install without a setuid
flag, or only executable by a certain group.
.P
\fBdpkg\-statoverride\fR is a utility to manage the list of stat
overrides. It has three basic functions: adding, removing and listing
overrides.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BI \-\-add " user group mode path"
Add an override for \fIpath\fP. \fIpath\fP does not need to exist
when this command is used; the override will be stored and used later.
Users and groups can be specified by their name (for example \fBroot\fR
or \fBnobody\fR), or by their number by prepending the number with a
‘\fB#\fR’ (for example \fB#0\fR or \fB#65534\fR).
The \fImode\fR needs to be specified in octal.

If \fB\-\-update\fP is specified and \fIpath\fP exists, it is immediately
set to the new owner and mode.
.TP
.BI \-\-remove " path"
Remove an override for \fIpath\fP, the status of \fIpath\fP is left
unchanged by this command.
.TP
.BR \-\-list " [\fIglob-pattern\fP]"
List all overrides. If a glob pattern is specified restrict the output
to overrides which match the glob.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Show the usage message and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-force\-help
Give help about the \fB\-\-force\-\fP\fIthing\fP options (since dpkg 1.19.5).
.TP
.B \-\-version
Show the version and exit.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-admindir " directory"
Set the administrative directory to \fIdirectory\fP.
This is where the \fIstatoverride\fP file is stored.
Defaults to «\fI%ADMINDIR%\fP».
.TP
.BI \-\-instdir " directory"
Set the installation directory, which refers to the directory where
packages get installed (since dpkg 1.19.2).
Defaults to «\fI/\fP».
.TP
.BI \-\-root " directory"
Set the root directory to \fBdirectory\fP, which sets the installation
directory to «\fIdirectory\fP» and the administrative
directory to «\fIdirectory\fP\fB%ADMINDIR%\fP» (since dpkg 1.19.2).
.TP
.B \-\-force\-\fIthings\fP
.TQ
.BR \-\-no\-force\-\fIthings\fP ", " \-\-refuse\-\fIthings\fP
Force or refuse (\fBno\-force\fP and \fBrefuse\fP mean the same thing)
to do some things (since dpkg 1.19.5).
\fIthings\fP is a comma separated list of things specified below.
\fB\-\-force\-help\fP displays a message describing them.
Things marked with (*) are forced by default.

\fIWarning: These options are mostly intended to be used by experts only.
Using them without fully understanding their effects may break your whole
system.\fP

\fBall\fP:
Turns on (or off) all force options.

\fBstatoverride\-add\fP:
Overwrite an existing stat override when adding it (since dpkg 1.19.5).

\fBstatoverride\-remove\fP:
Ignore a missing stat override when removing it (since dpkg 1.19.5).

\fBsecurity\-mac\fP(*):
Use platform-specific Mandatory Access Controls (MAC) based security when
installing files into the filesystem (since dpkg 1.19.5).
On Linux systems the implementation uses SELinux.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Force an action, even if a sanity check would otherwise prohibit it.
This is necessary to override an existing override.
This option is deprecated (since dpkg 1.19.5), it is replaced by
\fB\-\-force\-all\fP.
.TP
.B \-\-update
Immediately try to change the \fIpath\fP to the new owner and mode if it
exists.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Be less verbose about what we do.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The requested action was successfully performed.
.TP
.B 1
For \fB\-\-list\fP, if there are no overrides or none match the supplied
glob.
.TP
.B 2
Fatal or unrecoverable error due to invalid command-line usage, or
interactions with the system, such as accesses to the database,
memory allocations, etc.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B DPKG_ROOT
If set and the \fB\-\-instdir\fP or \fB\-\-root\fP options have not been
specified, it will be used as the filesystem root directory
(since dpkg 1.19.2).
.TP
.B DPKG_ADMINDIR
If set and the \fB\-\-admindir\fP or \fB\-\-root\fP options have not been
specified, it will be used as the \fBdpkg\fP data directory.
.TP
.B DPKG_FORCE
If set and none of the \fB\-\-force\-\fP\fI...\fP options have been
specified, it will be used as the force options to use (since dpkg 1.19.5).
.TP
.B DPKG_COLORS
Sets the color mode (since dpkg 1.18.5).
The currently accepted values are: \fBauto\fP (default), \fBalways\fP and
\fBnever\fP.
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I %ADMINDIR%/statoverride
File which contains the current list of stat overrides of the system. It
is located in the \fBdpkg\fP administration directory, along with other files
important to \fBdpkg\fP, such as \fIstatus\fP or \fIavailable\fP.
.IP
\fBNote:\fP \fBdpkg\-statoverride\fP preserves the old copy of this file, with
extension “\-old”, before replacing it with the new one.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg (1).
