# dpkg manual page - libdpkg(7)
#
# Copyright © 2024 Guillem Jover <guillem@debian.org>
#
# This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
# the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
# (at your option) any later version.
#
# This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
# GNU General Public License for more details.
#
# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
# along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

libdpkg - Debian package manager C library

=head1 DESCRIPTION

The B<libdpkg> C library provides functions and infrastructure for the dpkg
tool set, and external projects that need to integrate tightly with it.

The library provides a L<pkgconf(1)> entry named I<libdpkg>.

B<Warning>: The API provided by this library is highly volatile, still in
the process of being cleaned up. It is only supposed to be used internally
by dpkg for now. Header files, functions, variables and types might get
renamed, removed or change semantics. If you still have a need to use it,
which you would be doing anyway, say by locally building dpkg to get the
library, then define the C preprocessor macro LIBDPKG_VOLATILE_API in your
build to acknowledge that fact.

Due to the currently API volatility, only a static library is provided.

=head1 SEE ALSO

F<%PKGDOCDIR%/README.api>,
L<https://www.dpkg.org/doc/libdpkg/>.
