.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\" Original manpage cvs revision 1.19.2.1
.\" Translated by KURASAWA Nozomu <nabetaro@debian.or.jp>
.\" Last modified: Thu Mar 18 08:54:33 JST 2004
.\" WORD:	control		コントロール
.\" WORD:	extract		展開
.\" WORD:	executable	実行ファイル
.\" WORD:	substitution variables	展開変数
.\" WORD:	variable substitutions	変数展開
.\" Authors: Ian Jackson
.TH DPKG\-SOURCE 1 "January 2000" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.\" .SH NAME
.SH 名称 
dpkg\-source, dpkg\-gencontrol, dpkg\-shlibdeps, dpkg\-genchanges,
dpkg\-buildpackage, dpkg\-distaddfile, dpkg\-parsechangelog
.\" \- Debian source package tools
\- Debian ソースパッケージツール
.\" .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B dpkg-source
.BI "-x " filename .dsc
.br
.B dpkg-source -b
.RI [ options "] " directory " [" orig-directory |'']
.br
.B dpkg-gencontrol
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B dpkg-shlibdeps
.IR options
.br
.B dpkg-genchanges
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B dpkg-buildpackage
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B dpkg-distaddfile
.RI [ options ] " filename section priority"
.br
.B dpkg-parsechangelog
.RI [ options ]
.\" .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.B dpkg-source
.\" packs and unpacks Debian source archives.
は Debian ソースアーカイブを圧縮・展開する。

.B dpkg-gencontrol
.\" reads information from an unpacked Debian source tree and generates a
.\" binary package control file (which defaults to debian/tmp/DEBIAN/control);
.\" it also adds an entry for the binary package to
.\" .BR debian/files .
は展開した Debian ソースツリーから情報を読み、
バイナリパッケージコントロールファイル 
(デフォルトでは debian/tmp/DEBIAN/control)
を生成する。
またさらに、
.BR debian/files 
にバイナリパッケージのエントリを追加する。

.B dpkg-shlibdeps
.\" calculates shared library dependencies for executables named in its
.\" arguments.  The dependencies are added to the substitution
.\" variables file
.\" .B debian/substvars
.\" as variable names
.\" .BI shlibs: dependencyfield
.\" where
.\" .I dependencyfield
.\" is a dependency field name.  Any other variables starting
.\" .I shlibs:
.\" are removed from the file.
は、引数に指定した実行ファイルに関する、共有ライブラリの依存関係を計算する。
またこの依存関係を、展開変数ファイル
.B debian/substvars
に、変数名
.BI shlibs: dependencyfield
のように追加する。このとき
.I dependencyfield
は、依存関係フィールド名である。
その他の
.I shlibs:
で始まる変数はファイルから削除される。
.B dpkg-shlibdeps
.\" will read shared library dependency information from
.\" .BR debian/shlibs.local ,
.\" .BR /etc/dpkg/shlibs.override ,
.\" the
.\" .B shlibs
.\" control area file of the package containing the file which
.\" .B objdump
.\" reports as satisfying the library dependency, or
.\" .BR /etc/dpkg/shlibs.default .
は、
.BR debian/shlibs.local
、
.BR /etc/dpkg/shlibs.override
、ライブラリの依存関係を満たすような
.B objdump
が報告するファイルを含むパッケージの
.B shlibs
コントロールエリアファイル、
.BR /etc/dpkg/shlibs.default
のいずれかより共有依存情報を読む。
.\" The first match will be used.  See the
.\" .I Debian packaging manual
.\" for details of the format of shared library dependency files.
最初にマッチしたものを使用する。
共有ライブラリ依存関係ファイルの書式の詳細は、
.I Debian パッケージングマニュアル
を参照のこと。

.B dpkg-genchanges
.\" reads information from an unpacked and built Debian source tree and
.\" from the files it has generated and generates a Debian upload control
.\" file
.\" .RB ( .changes " file)."
は、展開・構築した Debian ソースツリーと、
Debian アップロードコントロールファイル
.RB ( .changes " file)."
より生成したファイルから情報を読み込む。

.B dpkg-buildpackage
.\" is a control script which can be used to help automate the building of
.\" a package.
は、パッケージ構築を自動的に補助するのに便利なコントロールスクリプトである。

.B dpkg-distaddfile
.\" adds an entry for a named file to
.\" .BR debian/files .
は、指定されたファイルのエントリを
.BR debian/files
に追加する。

.B dpkg-parsechangelog
.\" reads and parses the changelog of an unpacked Debian source tree and
.\" outputs the information in it to standard output in a machine-readable
.\" form.
は、展開した Debian ソースツリーの changelog を解析し、
その情報を機械が読める形で標準出力に出力する。

.\" None of these commands allow multiple options to be combined into one,
.\" and they do not allow the value for an option to be specified in a
.\" separate argument.
これらのコマンドは、複数のオプションを一つに組み合わせなければならず、
バラバラに指定したオプションの値は使用できない事に注意。

.\" .SH COMMON OPTIONS
.SH 共通オプション
.\" Many of these programs share options; these are described here,
.\" together with the programs that accept them.
ここで説明するプログラムの多くはオプションを共有している。
本項で述べたものはいずれのプログラムでも使用できる。
.TP
.BI -h
.\" Display the particular program's version and usage message, including
.\" a synopsis of the options it understands.  This option is understood
.\" by all the source package tools.
プログラムの詳細なバージョンと、使用方法を表示する。
ここには使用可能なオプションの文法が含まれる。
本オプションはすべてのソースパッケージツールで使用可能である。
.TP
.BI -v version
.\" In
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage ", " dpkg-genchanges " and " dpkg-parsechangelog
.\" this causes changelog information from all versions strictly later
.\" than
.\" .I version
.\" to be used.
.BR dpkg-buildpackage ", " dpkg-genchanges ", " dpkg-parsechangelog
では、全バージョンの changelog 情報から、指定した
.I バージョン
以降のものを抽出する。

.\" In
.\" .BR dpkg-gencontrol
.\" it sets the version number of the binary package which will be
.\" generated.
.BR dpkg-gencontrol
では、生成するバイナリパッケージのバージョン番号を設定する。
.TP
.BI -C changesdescription
.\" Read the description of the changes from the file
.\" .I changesdescription
.\" rather than using the information from the source tree's changelog
.\" file.  This is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage " and " dpkg-genchanges .
ソースツリーの changelog ファイルの情報ではなく
.I changesdescription
に指定したファイルにある変更説明を使用する。
このオプションは
.BR dpkg-buildpackage ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -m maintaineraddress
.\" Use
.\" .I maintaineraddress
.\" as the name and email address of the maintainer for this package,
.\" rather than using the information from the source tree's control.
.\" This is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage " and " dpkg-genchanges .
パッケージの保守担当者の名前・email アドレスに、
ソースツリーのコントロールファイルの情報ではなく
.I maintaineraddress
で指定したものを使用する。
このオプションは
.BR dpkg-buildpackage ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。

.TP
.BI -e maintaineraddress
.\" Use
.\" .I maintaineraddress
.\" as the name and email address of the maintainer for this upload,
.\" rather than using the information from the source tree's changelog.
.\" This is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage " and " dpkg-genchanges .
このパッケージをアップロードする保守担当者の名前・email アドレスに、
ソースツリーのコントロールファイルの情報ではなく
.I maintaineraddress
で指定したものを使用する。
このオプションは
.BR dpkg-buildpackage ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BR -si ", " -sa ", " -sd
.\" These options control whether the original source archive is included
.\" in the upload generated by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage " and " dpkg-genchanges
.\" if any source is being generated (ie,
.\" .BR -b " or " -B
.\" haven't been used).
これらのオプションは、ソースが生成されている
(つまり 
.BR -b " や " -B
が使用されていない) 場合、
.BR dpkg-buildpackage " や " dpkg-genchanges
で生成したアップロードするファイルに、
オリジナルのソースアーカイブが含まれるかどうかコントロールする。

.\" By default, or if
.\" .B -si
.\" is specified, the original source will be included if the version
.\" number ends in
.\" .BR -0 " or " -1 ,
.\" ie if the Debian revision part of the version number is
.\" .BR 0 " or " 1 .
デフォルトもしくは
.B -si
を指定した場合、バージョン番号の最後が
.BR -0 " や " -1 
である、つまりバージョン番号の Debian リビジョン部が
.BR 0 " か " 1 
であればオリジナルのソースが含まれる。

.B -sa
.\" forces the inclusion of the original source;
は強制的にオリジナルソースを含み、
.B -sd
.\" forces its exclusion and includes only the diff.
は強制的にオリジナルソースを含まず、差分のみ含む。
.TP
.BI -V name = value
.\" Set an output substitution variable.
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
.\" See below for a discussion of output substitution.
出力する展開変数をセットする。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
展開方法については後述。
.TP
.BI -T substvarsfile
.\" Read (or, for
.\" .BR dpkg-shlibdeps ,
.\" write) substitution variables in
.\" .IR substvarsfile ;
.\" the default is
.\" .BR debian/substvars .
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-shlibdeps " and " dpkg-genchanges .
.IR substvarsfile
にある展開変数 (デフォルトは
.BR debian/substvars
) を読み込む (
.BR dpkg-shlibdeps
では書き込む)。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-shlibdeps ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -D field = value
.\" Override or add an output control file field.
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
出力するコントロールフィールドを上書・追加する。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -U field
.\" Remove an output control file field.
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
出力するコントロールフィールドを削除する。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BR -b | -B | -S
.\" For
.\" .BR dpkg-genchanges " and " dpkg-buildpackage
.\" .BR -b " and " -B
.\" specify that a binary-only build is taking place.
.\" .B -b
.\" indicates that no source files are to be built and/or distributed, and
.\" .B -B
.\" that no architecture-independent binary package files are to be
.\" distributed either.
.BR dpkg-genchanges ", " dpkg-buildpackage
用に、
.BR -b " と " -B
で、バイナリのみ構築することを明示する。
.B -b
は構築・配布されるソースパッケージが存在しないことを表し、
.B -B
は配布するバイナリパッケージの中に、
アーキテクチャに依存しないものがないことを表す。
.\" .B -S
.\" specifies that only the source should be uploaded and no binary packages
.\" need to be made. The distinction between
.\" .BR -b " and " -B
.\" is only used by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage ;
.\" .B dpkg-genchanges
.\" just produces a
.\" .B .changes
.\" file for whatever files were produced by the
.\" .B binary-*
.\" target(s) of the package being built.
.B -S
はソースのみアップロードし、
バイナリパッケージを構築する必要がない事を明示する。
.BR -b " と " -B
の違いは
.BR dpkg-buildpackage
から呼ばれる
.B dpkg-genchanges
に現れる。
.B dpkg-genchanges
は、構築されるパッケージの
.B binary-*
ターゲットで生成したすべてのファイル用に
.B .changes
ファイルを生成するのみである。

.\" .B -b
.\" tells
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" to build a source package (rather than to extract one) - see below.
.B -b
は
.B dpkg-source
に (展開するのではなく) ソースパッケージを構築するよう指示する。
後の記述も参照すること。
.TP
.BI -c controlfile
.\" Specifies the main source control file to read information from.  The
.\" default is
.\" .BR debian/control .
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
情報を読み込むメインのコントロールファイルを指定する。
デフォルトは
.BR debian/control 
である。このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -l changelogfile
.\" Specifies the change log file to read information from.  The
.\" default is
.\" .BR debian/changelog .
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
情報を読み込む更新履歴ファイルを指定する。
デフォルトは
.BR debian/changelog 
である。このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -f fileslistfile
.\" Read or write the list of files to be uploaded here, rather than using
.\" .BR debian/files .
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges " and " dpkg-distaddfile .
.\" .BR debian/files
.BR debian/files
を使用せず、アップロードするファイルのリストを記述する。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -F changelogformat
.\" Specifies the format of the changelog.  By default the format is read
.\" from a special line near the bottom of the changelog (see the
.\" Debian packaging manual) or failing that defaults to
.\" .BR debian ,
.\" the standard format described in the
.\" .IR "Debian packaging manual" .
.\" This option is understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges .
changelog のフォーマットを指定する。デフォルトのフォーマットでは、
changelog (Debian パッケージングマニュアル参照) の最下行付近の
特殊行から読まれる。また、それが失敗した場合、自動的に
.BR debian 
(
.IR "Debian パッケージングマニュアル"
に記述された標準のフォーマット)となる。
このオプションは、
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
で使用できる。
.TP
.BI -W
.\" This option turns certain errors into warnings.  Only dpkg-source uses
.\" this, but 
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage
.\" recognizes it, and passes it thru to
.\" .BR dpkg-source "."
このオプションは特定のエラーを警告に変える。
dpkg-source だけで使用できるが 
.BR dpkg-buildpackage
が認識し、
.BR dpkg-source 
へスルーする。
.TP
.BI -E
.\" This option negates a previously set
.\" .BR -W "."
このオプションはすでにセットした
.BR -W 
オプションを無効にする。
.\" It is currently only understood by
.\" .BR dpkg-buildpackage " and " dpkg-source "."
現在、
.BR dpkg-buildpackage " と " dpkg-source 
で使用できる。
.\" .SH DPKG-SOURCE OPTIONS
.SH DPKG-SOURCE オプション
.\" When the common options
.\" .BR -c " and " -l
.\" are given with relative pathnames these are interpreted starting at
.\" the source tree's top level directory.
共通オプション
.BR -c ", " -l
を相対パス付きで指定した場合、
ソースツリーのトップレベルディレクトリからの相対パスとして解釈する。
.TP
.B -x
.\" Extract a source package.  One non-option argument should be supplied,
.\" the name of the Debian source control file
.\" .RB ( .dsc ).
ソースパッケージを展開する。オプション以外で Debian ソースコントロールファイル 
.RB ( .dsc )
の名前を引数に指定する必要がある。
.\" No options are useful with
.\" .BR "dpkg-source -x" .
.BR "dpkg-source -x"
とともに使用できるオプションはない。
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will read the names of the other file(s) making up the source package
.\" from the control file; they are assumed to be in the same directory as
.\" the
.\" .BR .dsc .
.B dpkg-source
は、コントロールファイルから、
ソースパッケージを作成する別のファイル名を取得する。
コントロールファイルは
.BR .dsc 
と同じディレクトリにあると仮定される。

.\" The files in the extracted package will have their permissions and
.\" ownerships set to those which would have been expected if the files
.\" and directories had simply been created - directories and executable
.\" files will be 0777 and plain files will be 0666, both modified by the
.\" extractors' umask; if the parent directory is setgid then the
.\" extracted directories will be too, and all the files and directories
.\" will inherit its group ownership.
展開したパッケージのファイルは、それぞれ以下のパーミッションと所有権を持つ。
ファイルやディレクトリが単純に作成された場合、
ディレクトリや実行ファイルは 0777 、通常ファイルは 0666 となる。
以上は展開者の umask で修正される。
親ディレクトリが setgid の場合、以下のディレクトリもそれを継承する。
また、ファイルやディレクトリはすべてそのグループ所有権を継承する。
.TP
.B -b
.\" Build: pack up a source tree.  One or two non-option arguments should
.\" be supplied.  The first is taken as the name of the directory
.\" containing the unpacked source tree.  If a second argument is supplied
.\" it should be the name of the original source directory or tarfile or
.\" the empty string if the package is a Debian-specific one and so has no
.\" Debianisation diffs.  If no second argument is supplied then
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will look for the original source tarfile
.\" .IB package _ upstream-version .orig.tar.gz
.\" or the original source directory
.\" .IB directory .orig
.\" or the empty string (no original source, and so no diff) depending on
.\" the arguments.
ソースツリーを構築する。オプション以外の引数を 1, 2 個受け取ることになる。
先頭には、展開するソースツリーが存在するディレクトリの名称の文字列を指定する。
第 2 引数が与えられた場合、オリジナルのソースディレクトリか tar ファイルの
名前、または Debian 特有のパッケージで、そのため Debian 化 diff がない場合、
空文字列であるべきである。
第 2 引数が与えられなければ、
.B dpkg-source
は引数に依存して、オリジナルソース tar ファイル
.IB package _ upstream-version .orig.tar.gz
か、オリジナルソースディレクトリ
.IB directory .orig
か、空文字列 (オリジナルソースがなく、diff がないため) を探す。

.TP
.B -i[<regexp>]
.\" You may specify a perl regular expression to match files you want
.\" filtered out of the list of files for the diff. (This list is
.\" generated by a find command.) \fB-i\fR by itself enables the option,
.\" with a default that will filter out CVS, RCS and libtool .deps
.\" subdirectories, and all files within them, as well as ~ suffixed
.\" backup files and DEADJOEs.
比較するファイルのリストから、フィルタをかけたいものを抽出するよう、
perl の正規表現を指定できる。(このリストは find コマンドで生成する)
\fB-i\fR 自身により、デフォルトでは CVS, RCS, libtool .deps 
サブディレクトリを除外して オプションを有効にする。
また、そのすべてのファイルに ~ を付けたバックアップファイルや DEADJOE 
のようにする。

.\" This is very helpful in cutting out extraneous files that get included
.\" in the .diff.gz, (eg: "debian/BUGS_TODO/*" or "debian/RCS/*,v").  For
.\" instance, if you maintain a package that you track via remote CVS,
.\" where you don't have access permissions for commiting the debian
.\" control files and making tags for \fIcvs-buildpackage(1)\fR, it is
.\" necessary to perform an extra checkout/update into a directory you
.\" keep pristine, to generate the .orig.tar.gz from.  That directory will
.\" have CVS/Entries files in it that will contain timestamps that differ
.\" from the ones in your working directory, thus causing them to be
.\" unnecessarily included in every .diff.gz, unless you use the \fB-i\fR
.\" switch.
これは .diff.gz に含まれた無関係なファイルを切り出すのに便利である
 (例: "debian/BUGS_TODO/*" や "debian/RCS/*,v")。
例えば、\fIcvs-buildpackage(1)\fR でタグを作成したり debian コントロール
ファイルをコミットするようなアクセス権がない、外部の CVS を追いかけて
パッケージを管理する場合がある。.orig.tar.gz を生成するために、
ディレクトリを元の状態にしておくよう余分に checkout/update を行う必要がある。
このディレクトリは、作業ディレクトリの中と異なるタイムスタンプのファイルを
格納した、CVS/Entries ファイルを持っている。
このために、もし \fB-i\fR スイッチを使用しなければ、すべての .diff.gz に無駄にそれを含めなければならない。
.TP
.B -I<filename>
.\" If this option is specified, the filename will be passed to tar's --exclude
.\" option when it is called to generate a .orig.tar.gz or .tar.gz file. For
.\" example, -ICVS will make tar skip over CVS directories when generating 
.\" a .tar.gz file. The option may be repeated multiple times to list multiple
.\" filenames to exclude.
このオプションで指定したファイル名が、.orig.tar.gz ファイルや .tar.gz ファイル
を生成するときに呼ばれる tar の --exclude オプションに渡される。
例えば、-ICVS では tar が .tar.gz ファイルを生成する際に 
CVS ディレクトリをスキップする。
複数のファイル名を除外したい場合には、このオプションを複数回指定する。
.TP
.\" .BR -sa , -sp , -su , -sk , -sA , -sP , -sU , -sK , -ss " with " -b
.BR -sa , -sp , -su , -sk , -sA , -sP , -sU , -sK , -ss " ( " -b " 使用時)"
.\" If
.\" .BR -sk " or " -sp
.\" is specified
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" expects the original source as a tarfile, by default
.IB package _ upstream-version .orig.tar.gz\fR.
.BR -sk " や " -sp
が指定されると、
.B dpkg-source
は、オリジナルソースが tar ファイルであるとして扱う。
デフォルトのファイル名は、
.IB package _ upstream-version .orig.tar.gz\fR
となる。
.\" It will leave this original source in place as a tarfile, or copy it
.\" to the current directory if it isn't already there
.\" If
.\" .B -sp
.\" is used rather than
.\" .B -sk
.\" it will remove it again afterwards.
この場所にオリジナルソースの tar ファイルを残すが、
まだファイルが存在しない場合、カレントディレクトリにコピーする。
.B -sk
ではなく
.B -sp
を指定した場合は、いったん削除した後に実行する。

.\" If
.\" .BR -su " or " -sr
.\" is specified the original source is expected as a directory, by
.\" default
.\" .IB package - upstream-version .orig
.\" and
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will create a new original source archive from it.  If
.\" .B -sr
.\" is used
.\" .B dpkg-source will remove that directory after it has been used.
.BR -su " や " -sr
を指定した場合、
.B dpkg-source
は、オリジナルソースがディレクトリであるとして扱い
(デフォルトは、
.IB package - upstream-version .orig
)、そこからオリジナルソースアーカイブを新規に作成する。
.B -sr
を使用すると、
.B dpkg-source 
はディレクトリを使用した後に削除する。

.\" If
.\" .B -ss
.\" is specified
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will expect that the original source is available both as a directory
.\" and as a tarfile.  If will use the directory to create the diff, but
.\" the tarfile to create the
.\" .BR .dsc .
.\" This option must be used with care - if the directory and tarfile do
.\" not match a bad source archive will be generated.
.B -ss
を指定すると、
.B dpkg-source
はオリジナルソースがディレクトリ・ tar ファイルの双方で利用可能である
という前提でして動作する。
ここでは diff を作成するためにディレクトリを使用するが、
.BR .dsc 
を作成するためには tar ファイルを使用する。
万一ディレクトリと tar ファイルが一致しない場合、不正なソースアーカイブが
生成されるため、本オプションを使用する場合は注意が必要である。

.\" If
.\" .B -sn
.\" is specified
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will not look for any original source, and will not generate a diff.
.\" The second argument, if supplied, must be the empty string.  This is
.\" used for Debian-specific packages which do not have a separate
.\" upstream source and therefore have no debianisation diffs.
.B -sn
を指定すると
.B dpkg-source
はオリジナルソースを参照しない。また diff も生成しない。
第 2 引数 (もしあれば) は空文字列でなければならない。
これは区別すべき上流ソースが存在せず、debian 化 diff を持たない 
Debian 特有のパッケージに使用する。

.\" If
.\" .BR -sa " or " -sA
.\" is specified
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" will look for the original source archive as a tarfile or as a
.\" directory - the second argument, if any, may be either, or the empty
.\" string (this is equivalent to using
.\" .BR -sn ).
.BR -sa " や " -sA
を指定した場合、
.B dpkg-source
は、tar ファイルやディレクトリ (第 2 引数があればどちらか、あるいは空文字列 (
.BR -sn
と等価) の場合もある) としてオリジナルソースアーカイブを捜す。
.\" If a tarfile is found it will unpack it to create the diff and remove
.\" it afterwards (this is equivalent to
.\" .BR -sp );
tar ファイルが存在する場合、これを展開して diff を作成しその後削除する (
.BR -sp
と等価)。
.\" if a directory is found it will pack it to create the original source
.\" and remove it afterwards (this is equivalent to
.\" .BR -sr );
ディレクトリが存在する場合、ここからオリジナルソースを圧縮して作成し、
ディレクトリは削除する (
.BR -sr
と等価)。
.\" if neither is found it will assume that the package has no
.\" debianisation diffs, only a straightforward source archive (this is
.\" equivalent to
.\" .BR -sn ).
どちらもない場合、debian 化 diff がなくソースアーカイブしか持たない
パッケージとして扱う (
.BR -sn 
と等価)。
.\" If both are found then dpkg-source will ignore the directory,
.\" overwriting it, if
.\" .B -sA
.\" was specified (this is equivalent to
.\" .BR -sP )
.\" or raise an error if
.\" .B -sa
.\" was specified.
.\" .B -sA
.\" is the default.
両方存在する場合、
.B -sA
 (
.BR -sP
と等価)を指定していれば、
dpkg-source はディレクトリを無視して上書きするが、
.B -sa
を指定していればエラーを上げる。
デフォルトは
.B -sA
である。

.\" .BR -sa ", " -sp ", " -sk ", " -su " and "  -sr
.\" will not overwrite existing tarfiles or directories.  If this is
.\" desired then
.\" .BR -sA ", " -sP ", " -sK ", " -sU " and "  -sR
.\" should be used instead.
.BR -sa ", " -sp ", " -sk ", " -su ", "  -sr
では既存の tar ファイルやディレクトリを更新しない。
更新したい場合は、
.BR -sA ", " -sP ", " -sK ", " -sU ", "  -sR
を使用するべきである。
.TP
.\" .BR -sp , -su , -sn " with " -x
.BR -sp , -su , -sn " ( " -x " 使用時)"
.\" In all cases any existing original source tree will be removed.
すべてのケースで既存のオリジナルソースツリーは削除される。

.\" If
.\" .B -sp
.\" is used when extracting then the original source (if any) will be left
.\" as a tarfile.  If it is not already located in the current directory
.\" or if an existing but different file is there it will be copied there.
.\" This is the default.
展開時に
.B -sp
を使うと、
オリジナルソースが存在すれば tar ファイルとして残る。
カレントディレクトリに存在しない、ないし既存であるが
異なるファイルが存在する場合は、そこにコピーされる。これはデフォルトである。

.B -su
.\" unpacks the original source tree.
では、オリジナルソースツリーを展開する。

.B -sn
.\" ensures that the original source is neither copied to the current
.\" directory nor unpacked.  Any original source tree that was in the
.\" current directory is still removed.
は、オリジナルソースがカレントディレクトリにコピーされておらず、
展開されてもいないことを保証する。
カレントディレクトリにあったいずれのオリジナルソースツリーも削除されたままである。
.\" .SH DPKG-GENCONTROL OPTIONS
.SH DPKG-GENCONTROL オプション
.B dpkg-gencontrol
.\" does not take any non-option arguments.
はオプションなしで実行することはできない。
.TP
.BI -p package
.\" Generate information for the binary package
.\" .IR package .
.IR package
バイナリパッケージの情報を生成する。
.\" If the source control file lists only one binary package then this
.\" option may be omitted; otherwise it is essential to select which
.\" binary package's information to generate.
ソースコントロールファイルに、ただ 1 つのバイナリパッケージが記述されている
場合、このオプションは省略できる。
そうでない場合は、どのバイナリパッケージの情報を生成するか選択する必要がある。
.TP
.BI -n filename
.\" Assume the filename of the package will be
.\" .I filename
.\" instead of the normal package_version_arch.deb filename.
パッケージのファイル名が、通常の package_version_arch.deb ではなく
.I filename
であると仮定する。
.TP
.BR -is ", " -ip ", " -isp
.\" Include the
.\" .BR Section " and " Priority
.\" fields for this package from the main source control file in the
.\" binary package control file being generated.  Usually this information
.\" is not included here, but only in the
.\" .B .changes
.\" file.
メインのソースコントロールファイルより
.BR Section " および " Priority
フィールドを、生成するバイナリパッケージのコントロールファイルに取り込む。
通常、この情報はここで取り込むだけではなく、
.B .changes
ファイルでも使用する。
.\" .B -isp
.\" includes both fields,
.\" .BR -is " only the " Section " and " -ip " only the " Priority .
.B -isp
は両方のフィールドを取り込み、
.BR -is " は " Section " のみ、 " -ip " は " Priority " のみ取り込む。"
.TP
.BI -P packagebuilddir
.\" Tells
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" that the package is being built in
.\" .I packagebuilddir
.\" instead of
.\" .BR debian/tmp .
.B dpkg-source
に
.BR debian/tmp .
ではなく、
.I packagebuilddir
でパッケージの構築を行うよう指示を出す。
.\" This value is used to find the default value of the
.\" .B Installed-Size
.\" substitution variable and control file field (using
.\" .BR du ),
.\" and for the default location of the output file.
この値は
.B Installed-Size
置換変数やコントロールファイルフィールドのデフォルト値を探したり (
.BR du
 利用)、
デフォルトのファイル出力先を指定するのに使用する。
.TP
.B -O
.\" Causes the control file to be printed to standard output, rather than
.\" to
.\" .B debian/tmp/DEBIAN/control
.\" (or
.\" .IB packagebuilddir /DEBIAN/control
.\" if
.\" .B -P
.\" was used).
コントロールファイルを、
.B debian/tmp/DEBIAN/control
(
.B -P
を使用する時は
.IB packagebuilddir /DEBIAN/control
) ではなく標準出力に出力する。
.\" .SH DPKG-SHLIBDEPS OPTIONS
.SH DPKG-SHLIBDEPS オプション
.B dpkg-shlibdeps
.\" interprets non-option arguments as executable names, just as if they'd
.\" been supplied as
.\" .BI -e executable\fR.
はオプションではない引数を、
.BI -e executable\fR
で与えられたのと同様に、実行ファイルとして解釈する。
.TP
.BI -e executable
.\" Include dependencies appropriate for the shared libraries required by
.\" .IR executable .
.IR executable 
が必要とする、適当な共有ライブラリを依存関係に含める。
.TP
.BI -d dependencyfield
.\" Add dependencies to be added to the control file dependency field
.\" .IR dependencyfield .
.\" (The dependencies for this field are placed in the variable
.\" .BI shlibs: dependencyfield\fR.)
コントロールファイルの依存関係フィールドに
.IR dependencyfield 
依存関係を加える。
(このフィールドの依存関係は変数
.BI shlibs: dependencyfield\fR
に置かれる)

.\" The
.\" .BI -d dependencyfield
.\" option takes effect for all executables after the option, until the
.\" next
.\" .BI -d dependencyfield\fR.
.\" The default
.\" .I dependencyfield
.\" is
.\" .BR Depends .
.BI -d dependencyfield
オプションは次の
.BI -d dependencyfield
までに与えられた、すべての実行ファイルに効果を現わす。
デフォルトの
.I dependencyfield
は
.BR Depends 
である。

.\" If the same dependency entry (or set of alternatives) appears in more
.\" than one of the recognised dependency field names
.\" .BR Pre-Depends ", " Depends ", " Recommends ", " Enhances " or " Suggests
.\" then
.\" .B dpkg-shlibdeps
.\" will automatically remove the dependency from all fields except the
.\" one representing the most important dependencies.
同じ依存関係エントリ (あるいは代替セット) が
認識される依存関係フィールド名
.BR Pre-Depends ", " Depends ", " Recommends ", " Enhances ", " Suggests
の中から複数現われる場合、
.B dpkg-shlibdeps
は、最重要依存関係であるもの以外のすべてのフィールドから、
自動的に依存関係を削除する。
.TP
.BI -p varnameprefix
.\" Causes substitution variables to start with
.\" .IB varnameprefix :
.\" instead of
.\" .BR shlibs: .
.BR shlibs: 
ではなく、
.IB varnameprefix :
で始まるものを展開変数とする。
.\" Likewise, any existing substitution variables starting with
.\" .IB varnameprefix :
.\" (rather than
.\" .BR shlibs: )
.\" are removed from the the substitution variables file.
同様に、(
.BR shlibs:
ではなく) 
.IB varnameprefix :
で始まる任意の既存の展開変数を展開変数ファイルから削除する。
.TP
 .BI -L localshlibsfile
.\" Causes
.\" .B dpkg-shlibs
.\" to read overriding shared library dependency information from
.\" .I localshlibsfile
.\" instead of
.\" .BR debian/shlibs.local .
.BR debian/shlibs.local 
に代えて
.I localshlibsfile
から、
.B dpkg-shlibs
へ最優先共有ライブラリ依存情報を読み込む。
.TP
.B -O
.\" Causes the substitution variable settings to be printed to standard
.\" output, rather than being added to the substitution variables file
.\" .RB ( debian/substvars
.\" by default).
展開変数の設定を
展開変数ファイル (デフォルトでは
.RB debian/substvars
) に追加せず、標準出力に出力する。
.\" .SH DPKG-GENCHANGES OPTIONS
.SH DPKG-GENCHANGES オプション
.B dpkg-genchanges
.\" does not take any non-option arguments.
はオプション以外の引数を取らない。
.TP
.BI -u uploadfilesdir
.\" Look for the files to be uploaded in
.\" .I uploadfilesdir
.\" rather than
.\" .B ..
.\" .RB ( dpkg-genchanges
.\" needs to find these files so that it can include their sizes and
.\" checksums in the
.\" .B .changes
.\" file).
アップロードするファイルを
.B ..
からではなく
.I uploadfilesdir
から探す (
.B .changes
ファイルに、アップロードするファイルのファイルサイズとチェックサムを
含めるために、このファイルを探す必要がある)。
.TP
.B -q
.\" Usually
.\" .B dpkg-genchanges
.\" will produce informative messages on standard error, for example about
.\" how many of the package's source files are being uploaded.
.\" .B -q
.\" suppresses these messages.
通常
.B dpkg-genchanges
は情報メッセージを標準エラー出力に出力する
(例、アップロードするパッケージのソースファイル数)。
.B -q
はこのメッセージを抑制する。
.\" .SH DPKG-BUILDPACKAGE OPTIONS
.SH DPKG-BUILDPACKAGE オプション
.B dpkg-buildpackage
.\" does not take any non-option arguments.
はオプション以外の引数を取らない。
.TP
.BI -k key-id
.\" Specify a key-ID to use when signing packages.
パッケージのサインに使用する key-ID を設定する。
.TP
.BI -r gain-root-command
.\" When
.\" .B dpkg-buildpackage
.\" needs to execute part of the build process as root, it prefixes the
.\" command it executes with
.\" .I gain-root-command
.\" if one has been specified.
.B dpkg-buildpackage
が root として構築プロセスの一部を実行する必要がある場合、
.I gain-root-command
で指定したコマンドを実行するコマンドの前に付ける。
.\" .I gain-root-command
.\" should be the name of a program on the
.\" .B PATH
.\" and will get as arguments the name of the real command to run and the
.\" arguments it should take.
.I gain-root-command
は
.B PATH
に存在するプログラム名で、実行する実際のコマンドとそのコマンドがとる引数を、
引数に指定せねばならない。
.\" .I gain-root-command
.\" should not contain spaces or any other shell metacharacters.
.\" .\" what happens, if it contains spaces? (hs)
.I gain-root-command
にはスペースやその他シェルのメタ文字を使用してはならない。
.\" .I gain-root-command
.\" might typically be
.\" .BR sudo ", " super " or " really .
一般的に
.I gain-root-command
は
.BR sudo ", " super ", " really 
にする。
.\" .B su
.\" is not suitable, since it requires a
.\" .B -c
.\" option to run a command and even then it can only invoke the user's
.\" shell with
.\" .B -c
.\" instead of passing arguments individually to the command to be run.
コマンドを実行するのに
.B -c
オプションを必要とし、
さらに
.B -c
オプションを使用しても、実行するコマンドへ引数を渡さずに
ユーザのシェルを起動するだけなので、
.B su
は適切ではない。
.TP
.BI -p sign-command
.\" When
.\" .B dpkg-buildpackage
.\" needs to execute GPG or PGP to sign a source control
.\" .RB ( .dsc )
.\" file or a
.\" .B .changes
.\" file it will run
.\" .I sign-command
.\" (searching the
.\" .B PATH
.\" if necessary) instead of
.\" .BR pgp .
.B dpkg-buildpackage
がソースコントロールファイル
.RB ( .dsc )
や、
.B .changes
ファイルの署名に GPG や PGP を実行する必要がある場合、
.BR pgp 
の代わりに
.I sign-command
を実行する (必要なら
.B PATH
を検索
)。
.\" .I sign-command
.\" will get all the arguments that
.\" .B pgp
.\" would have gotten. If
.\" .I sign-command
.\" takes its arguments in GPG rather than PGP style, you should give
.\" the
.\" .B -sgpg
.\" option.
.\" .I sign-command
.\" should not contain spaces or any other shell metacharacters.
.I sign-command
は
.B pgp
が受け取るすべての引数を使用する。
PGP 形式ではなく GPG 形式の引数を使用する場合は、
.B -sgpg
オプションを与えればよい。
.I sign-command
にはスペースやその他シェルのメタ文字を使用してはならない。
.TP
.B -tc
.\" Clean the source tree (using
.\" .I gain-root-command
.\" .BR "debian/rules clean" )
.\" after the package has been built.
パッケージ構築後にソースツリーを (
.I gain-root-command
.BR "debian/rules clean" 
を使用して) 掃除する。
.TP
.BR -us ", " -uc
.\" Do not sign the source package or the .changes file, respectively.
ソースパッケージや .changes ファイルに (それぞれ) 署名しない。
.TP
.BI -a architecture
.\" Specify the Debian architecture we build for. The architecture of the
.\" machine we build on is determined automatically, and is also the default
.\" for the host machine.
構築先の Debian アーキテクチャを指定する。
構築するマシンのアーキテクチャは自動的に決定され、
デフォルトではそれが構築先となる。
.TP
.B -i[<regexp>]
.\" Passed unchanged to
.\" .BR dpkg-source .
.BR dpkg-source 
にそのまま渡す。
.TP
.B -I<filename>
.\" Passed unchanged to
.\" .BR dpkg-source .
.\" May be repeated multiple times.
.BR dpkg-source 
にそのまま渡す。複数回繰り返す可能性がある。
.TP
.B -D
.\" Check build dependencies and conflicts; abort if unsatisfied.
構築依存関係や競合を検出し、これを満たさなければ異常終了する。
.TP
.B -d
.\" Do not check build dependencies and conflicts.
構築依存関係や競合を検出しない。
.TP
.B -nc
.\" Do not clean the source tree(implies -b).
ソースツリーの掃除をしない (暗に -b を含む)。
.\" .SH DPKG-DISTADDFILE ARGUMENTS
.SH DPKG-DISTADDFILE 引数
.\" .B dpkg-distaddfile
.\" does not take any non-common options.  It takes three non-option
.\" arguments, the filename and the section and priority for the
.\" .B .changes
.\" file.
.B dpkg-distaddfile
は共有オプションしか取らない。オプション以外では
.B .changes
ファイル用に、ファイル名、セクション、優先度といった 3 個の引数を取る。

.\" The filename should be specified relative to the directory where
.\" .B dpkg-genchanges
.\" will expect to find the files, usually
.\" .BR .. ,
.\" rather than being a pathname relative to the current directory when
.\" .B dpkg-distaddfile
.\" is run.
ファイル名には、
.B dpkg-distaddfile
を実行するときのカレントディレクトリからの相対パスではなく
.B dpkg-genchanges
がファイルを通常検出するであろう相対ディレクトリ (通常は
.BR .. 
) を明示するべきである。
.\" .SH DPKG-PARSECHANGELOG ARGUMENTS
.SH DPKG-PARSECHANGELOG 引数
.B dpkg-parsechangelog
.\" does not take any non-common options or non-option arguments.
共通以外のオプションや、オプションではない引数を取らない。
.\" .SH VARIABLE SUBSTITUTION
.SH 変数展開
.\" Before
.\" .BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges
.\" write their control information (to the source control file
.\" .B .dsc
.\" for
.\" .B dpkg-source
.\" and to standard output for
.\" .BR dpkg-gencontrol " and " dpkg-genchanges )
.\" they perform some variable substitutions on the output file.
.BR dpkg-source ", " dpkg-gencontrol ", " dpkg-genchanges
がそれぞれコントロール情報 (
.B dpkg-source
はソースコントロールファイル
.B .dsc
、
.BR dpkg-gencontrol " と " dpkg-genchanges
は標準出力
) を書き出す前に、出力ファイルで変数展開を実行する。

.\" A variable substitution has the form
.\" .BI ${ variable-name }\fR.
変数展開は
.BI ${ variable-name }\fR
の形で行う。
.\" Variable names consist of alphanumerics, hyphens and colons and start
.\" with an alphanumeric.  Variable substitutions are performed repeatedly
.\" until none are left; the full text of the field after the substitution
.\" is rescanned to look for more substitutions.
変数名は英数字、ハイフン、コロンで構成され、先頭は英数字である。
展開後のフィールド全体に対して、さらに展開されるか再捜査するため、
変数展開が残らないよう繰り返し実行される。

.\" After all the substitutions have been done each occurence of the
.\" string
.\" .B ${}
.\" (which is not a legal substitution) is replaced with a
.\" .B $
.\" sign.
展開がすべて行われた後、文字列
.B ${}
の各項目は、
.B $
記号で置き換えられる (展開法則外) 。

.\" Variables can be set using the
.\" .B -V
.\" common option.  They can be also specified in the file
.\" .B debian/substvars
.\" (or whatever other file is specified using the
.\" .B -T
.\" option).  This file consists of lines of the form
.\" .IB name = value\fR.
変数は
.B -V
共通オプションで設定できる。
また、
.B debian/substvars
ファイル (または
.B -T
オプションで指定したファイル) に指定もできる。このファイルは各行を
.IB name = value\fR
の形で記述する。
.\" Trailing whitespace on each line, blank lines, and
.\" lines starting with a
.\" .B #
.\" symbol (comments) are ignored.
各行の空白、空行、
.B #
文字で始まる行 (コメント) は無視される。

.\" Additionally, the following standard variables are available:
加えて、以下の標準変数が使用可能である:
.TP
.BI Arch
.\" The current build architecture (from
.\" .BR "dpkg \-\-print-architecture" ).
現在のビルドアーキテクチャ (
.BR "dpkg \-\-print-architecture"
から)
.TP
.B Source-Version
.\" The source package version (from the changelog file).
ソースパッケージのバージョン (changelog ファイルより)
.TP
.B Installed-Size
.\" The total size of the package's installed files.  This value is copied
.\" into the corresponding control file field; setting it will modify the
.\" value of that field.  If this variable isn't set
.\" .B dpkg-gencontrol
.\" will use
.\" .B du -k debian/tmp
.\" to find the default value.
パッケージをインストールした際、ファイルの合計サイズ。
この値はコントロールファイルの該当するフィールドにコピーされるため、
この設定でフィールドの値を変更できる。
この変数を設定しない場合、
.B dpkg-gencontrol
は、デフォルト値を取得するため
.B du -k debian/tmp
を使用する。
.TP
.B Extra-Size
.\" Additional disk space used when the package is installed.  If this
.\" variable is set its value is added to that of the
.\" .B Installed-Size
.\" variable (whether set explicitly or using the default value) before it
.\" is copied into the
.\" .B Installed-Size
.\" control file field.
パッケージインストール時に追加で消費されるディスク領域。
この変数を設定していると、
.B Installed-Size
コントロールファイルフィールドにコピーする前に、
.B Installed-Size
変数の値 (明示、デフォルトのどちらでも) に加算される。
.TP
.BI F: fieldname
.\" The value of the output field
.\" .IR fieldname
.\" (which must be given in the canonical capitalisation).  Setting these
.\" variables has no effect other than on places where they are expanded
.\" explicitly.
出力フィールド
.IR fieldname
(大文字でなければならない) の値。
この変数の設定は、明示的に展開する場所以外では効果がない。
.TP
.B Format
.\" The
.\" .B .changes
.\" file format version generated by this version of the source packaging
.\" scripts.  If you set this variable the contents of the
.\" .B Format
.\" field in the
.\" .B .changes
.\" file will change too.
.B .changes
ファイルを生成したソースパッケージングスクリプトのバージョン。
この変数を設定すると、
.B .changes
ファイルの
.B Format
フィールドも変更される。
.TP
.BR Newline ", " Space ", " Tab
.\" These variables each hold the corresponding character.
それぞれ対応する文字を保持する。
.TP
.BI shlibs: dependencyfield
.\" Variable settings with names of this form are generated by
.\" .B dpkg-shlibdeps
.\" - see above.
.B dpkg-shlibdeps
で生成した形式の名前を持った変数設定。(上記を参照)
.LP
.\" If a variable is referred to but not defined it generates a warning
.\" and an empty value is assumed.
変数が参照されるが定義されない場合警告され、空値と見なされる。
.\" .SH FILES
.SH ファイル
.TP
.B debian/control
.\" The main source control information file, giving version-independent
.\" information about the source package and the binary packages it can
.\" produce.
ソースパッケージとバイナリパッケージについてバージョンに依存しない情報を持つ、
メインのソースコントロール情報ファイル。
.TP
.B debian/changelog
.\" The changelog file, used to obtain version-dependent information about
.\" the source package, such as the urgency and distribution of an upload,
.\" the changes made since a particular release, and the source version
.\" number itself.
ソースパッケージに関するバージョン依存の情報 (アップロード緊急配布、
特定のリリース以来行なわれた変更、ソースのバージョン番号) 
を記述した changelogファイル。
.TP
.B debian/files
.\" The list of generated files which are part of the upload being
.\" prepared.
アップロード準備中の、生成されたファイルのリスト。
.\" .B dpkg-gencontrol
.\" adds the presumed filenames of binary packages whose control files it
.\" generates here;
.\" .B dpkg-distaddfile
.\" can be used to add additional files.
.B dpkg-gencontrol
は、生成するバイナリパッケージのコントロールファイル用に、
推定したファイル名を加える。さらにファイルを加えるのに
.B dpkg-distaddfile
を使用できる。
.\" .B dpkg-genchanges
.\" reads the data here when producing a
.\" .B .changes
.\" file.
.B dpkg-genchanges
は
.B .changes
ファイル生成時にこのデータを読み込む。
.TP
.B debian/substvars
.\" List of substitution variables and values.
展開変数と値のリスト。
.TP
.B debian/shlibs.local
.\" Package-local overriding shared library dependency information.
パッケージごとに上書きする、共有ライブラリ依存情報。
.TP
.B /etc/dpkg/shlibs.override
.\" Per-system overriding shared library dependency information.
システムごとに上書きする、共有ライブラリ依存情報。
.TP
.B /etc/dpkg/shlibs.default
.\" Per-system default shared library dependency information.
システムごとのデフォルト共有ライブラリ依存情報。
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" The point at which field overriding occurs compared to certain
.\" standard output field settings is rather confused.
フィールドの上書きがある標準出力フィールドの設定と比較する点がわかりにくい。

.\" The binary package entries in the 
.\" .B debian/files
.\" file will be passed through variable substitution twice.  This should
.\" not matter, since
.\" .BR $ ", " { " and " }
.\" are not legal in package names or version numbers.
.B debian/files
ファイルのバイナリパッケージエントリは変数展開によって 2 度行われる。
.BR $ " や " { ", " }
はパッケージ名や、バージョン番号では有効でないので、重要視するべきではない。

.\" It should be possible to specify spaces and shell metacharacters in
.\" and initial arguments for
.\" .IR gain-root-command " and " sign-command .
空白やシェルのメタ文字を中に指定することや、
.IR gain-root-command " や " sign-command 
用の初期化引数を指定するのを可能にするべき。

.\" .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 参照
.\" .IR "Debian packaging manual" ,
.IR "Debian パッケージングマニュアル" ,
.br
.\" .IR "Debian policy manual" ,
.IR "Debian ポリシーマニュアル" ,
.br
.BR dpkg\-deb (1),
.BR dpkg (8),
.BR dselect (8),
.BR gpg (1),
.BR pgp (1).
.\" .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\" The utilities and this manpage were written by Ian Jackson.
このユーティリティと manpage は Ian Jackson によって書かれた。
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright (C) 1995-1996 Ian Jackson
.br
Copyright (C) 2000 Wichert Akkerman
.br
This is free software; see the GNU General Public Licence version 2 or later
for copying conditions. There is NO WARRANTY.  See
.B /usr/share/doc/dpkg/copyright
and
.B /usr/share/common-licenses/GPL
for details.
.SH 翻訳者
倉澤 望 <nabetaro@debian.or.jp>
