.\" Hey Emacs! This file is -*- nroff -*- source.
.\" Original manpage cvs revision 1.8.2.1
.\" Translated by KURASAWA Nozomu <nabetaro@debian.or.jp>
.\" Last modified: Sun Nov 30 21:47:51 JST 2003
.\"WORD:	system administrator	システム管理者
.\"WORD:	available		利用可能
.\"WORD:	dependencies		依存関係
.\"WORD:	front-end		フロントエンド
.\"WORD:	low-level		下位層
.\"WORD:	conflict		競合
.\"WORD:	package repositories	パッケージリポジトリ
.\"WORD:	retrieve		取得(する)
.\"WORD:	screen			画面
.\"WORD:	access method		アクセス方式
.\"WORD:	status			状況
.\"WORD:	interactive		対話的
.TH DSELECT 1 "July 2001" "Debian Project" "Debian"
.\" .SH NAME
.SH 名称
.\" dselect \- Debian package management frontend
dselect \- Debian パッケージ管理フロントエンド
.\" .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.B dselect
[\-\-admindir <directory>] [\-\-help] [\-\-version] [\-\-licence | \-\-license]
[\-\-expert] [\-\-debug | \-D <file>] [\fI<action>\fP]
[\-\-colour | \-\-color screenpart:[foreground],[background][:attr[+attr+..]]]
.\" .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" .B dselect
.\" is one of the primary user interfaces for managing packages on a Debian
.\" system.  At the \fBdselect\fP main menu, the system administrator can:
.\"  \- Update the list of available package versions,
.\"  \- View the status of installed and available packages,
.\"  \- Alter package selections and manage dependencies,
.\"  \- Install new packages or upgrade to newer versions.
.B dselect
は Debian システムの、主要なパッケージ管理用ユーザインターフェースの
一つである。システム管理者は、\fBdselect\fP のメインメニューで以下の
操作を行える。
 \- 利用可能パッケージのバージョンリストの更新。
 \- インストール済み・利用可能パッケージの状況の参照。
 \- 代替パッケージの選択及び依存関係管理。
 \- 新規パッケージのインストールや新バージョンへの更新。
.PP
.\" .B dselect 
.\" operates as a front-end to \fBdpkg(8)\fP, the low-level debian package
.\" handling tool.  It features a full-screen package selections manager
.\" with package depends and conflicts resolver.  When run with adminitrator
.\" priviledges, packages can be installed, upgraded and removed. Various
.\" access methods can be configured to retrieve available package version
.\" information and installable packages from package repositories.
.\" Depending on the used access method, these repositories can be public
.\" archive servers on the internet, local archive servers or cdroms.
.\" The recommended access method is \fIapt\fP, which is provided by the
.\" package \fBapt\fP.
.B dselect 
は、\fBdpkg(8)\fP (下位層 Debian パッケージ管理ツール) の
フロントエンドとして動作する。
パッケージの依存・競合の解決を行なえる、
全画面パッケージ選択マネージャであることが特徴である。
管理者権限で起動すると、パッケージのインストール、更新、削除を
行うことができる。
またパッケージリポジトリより、
利用可能パッケージのバージョン情報や、
インストール可能パッケージ
の取得するための、
様々なアクセス方式を設定できる。
使用するアクセス方式によって、インターネット上の公開サーバ、
ローカルサーバ、CD-ROM をリポジトリにできる。
推奨するアクセス方式は、\fBapt\fP パッケージで提供する \fIapt\fP である。
.PP 
.\" Normally \fBdselect\fP is invoked without parameters.  An interactive
.\" menu is presented, offering the user a list of actions.  If an action
.\" is given as argument, then that action is started immediately.  Several
.\" commandline parameters are still available to modify the running behaviour
.\" of \fBdselect\fP or show additional information about the program.
通常、\fBdselect\fP はパラメータなしで起動する。
ユーザへは、対話的メニューで、アクションのリストを提供する。
引数で、アクションを与えられた場合、直ちにそのアクションを実行する。
いくつかのコマンドラインパラメータで、\fBdselect\fP の動きを修正したり、
プログラムの補足情報を示すことができる。
.\" .SH OPTIONS 
.\" All options can be specified both on the commandline and in the \fBdselect\fP 
.\" configuration file \fI/etc/dpkg/dselect.cfg\fP. Each line in the 
.\" configuration file is either an option (exactly the same as the
.\" commandline option but without leading dashes) or a comment (if it starts
.\" with a \fB#\fR).
.SH オプション
オプションはすべて、コマンドライン及び \fBdselect\fP の設定ファイル 
\fI/etc/dpkg/dselect.cfg\fP の両方で指定できる。
設定ファイル中の各行には、オプション (正確にはコマンドラインオプションからダッシュを除いたもの) か、コメント (行が \fB#\fR で始まる場合) を記述する。
.br
.TP
.\" .B --admindir <directory>
.\" Changes the directory where the dpkg `status', `available' and similar
.\" files are located. This defaults to \fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP
.\" and normally there shouldn't be any need to change it.
.B --admindir <directory>
dpkg が使用する `status' ファイルや `available' ファイルなどを
置くディレクトリを変更する。
デフォルトは \fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP で、通常変更する必要はない。
.TP
.\" .B --debug <file> | -D<file>
.\" Turn on debugging. Debugging information is sent to \fI<file>\fP.
.B --debug <file> | -D<file>
デバッグを有効にする。デバッグ情報は \fI<file>\fP に送られる。
.TP
.\" .B --expert
.\" Turns on expert mode, i.e. doesn't display possibly annoying help 
.\" messages.
.B --expert
エキスパートモードを有効にする。つまり、うるさいヘルプを表示しない。
.TP
.\" .B --colour | --color screenpart:[foreground],[background][:attr[+attr+..]]
.\" Configures screen colors. This works only if your display supports colors.
.\" This option may be used multiple times (and is best used in
.\" \fIdselect.cfg\fP). Each use changes the color (and optionally, other
.\" attributes) of one part of the screen.
.\" The parts of the screen (from top to bottom) are:
.B --colour | --color screenpart:[foreground],[background][:attr[+attr+..]]
表示色を設定する。
ディスプレイがカラー表示をサポートしている場合に有効である。
このオプションは、複数回指定できる (さらに \fIdselect.cfg\fP で一番使用される) 
かもしれない。
指定ごとに、画面の一部の色(や他の属性)を変更する。
画面 (上から下まで) の部位は次のとおり:
.RS
.TP
.B title
.\" The screen title.
画面タイトル
.TP
.B listhead
.\" The header line above the list of packages.
パッケージリストの上のヘッダライン
.TP
.B list
.\" The scrolling list of packages (and also some help text).
パッケージリストのスクロール領域 (ヘルプも表示する)
.TP
.B listsel
.\" The selected item in the list.
リスト内の選択行
.TP
.B pkgstate
.\" In the list of packages, the text indicating the current state of each
.\" package.
パッケージリスト中、パッケージの現在状況表示部
.TP
.B pkgstatesel
.\" In the list of packages, the text indicating the current state of the
.\" currently selected package.
パッケージリスト中、選択したパッケージの現在状況表示部
.TP
.B infohead
.\" The header line that displays the state of the currently selected package.
選択中パッケージの状況表示部のヘッダ行
.TP
.B infodesc
.\" The package's short description.
パッケージの短い説明文
.TP
.B info
.\" Used to display package info such as the package's description.
パッケージの説明などのパッケージ情報表示部
.TP
.B infofoot
.\" The last line of the screen when selecting packages.
パッケージ選択時の画面最下行
.TP
.B query
.\" Used to display query lines
要求行表示部
.TP
.B helpscreen
.\" Color of help screens.
ヘルプ画面の色
.RE
.P
.\" After the part of the screen comes a colon and the color specification. You
.\" can specify either the foreground color, the background color, or both,
.\" overriding the compiled-in colors. Use standard curses color names.
画面の部位の後に、コロンと色設定を記述する。
コンパイル時の色を無視して、前景色、背景色あるいは両方を指定することができる。
標準 curses 色名称を使用する。
.P
.\" Optionally, after the color specification is another colon, and an
.\" attribute specification. This is a list of one or more attributes,
.\" separated by plus ("+") characters. Available attributes include (not all
.\" of these will work on all terminals): normal, standout, underline, reverse,
.\" blink, bright, dim, bold
任意で、色設定の後に別のコロンで、属性を設定できる。
これはプラス("+")文字によって分離された、複数の属性のリストである。
利用可能な属性を以下列挙する(すべての属性がすべての端末で有効とは限らない):
normal, standout, underline, reverse, blink, bright, dim, bold
.TP
.B --help
.\" Print a brief help text and exit successfully.
簡単なヘルプを表示し、正常終了する。
.TP
.B --licence | --license
.\" Displays the \fBdselect\fP copyright and license information and exits 
.\" successfully.
\fBdselect\fP の著作権情報とライセンス情報を表示し、正常終了する。
.TP
.B --version
.\" Print version information and exit successfully.
バージョン情報を表示し、正常終了する。
.\" .SH USAGE
.SH 使用方法
.\" When
.\" .B dselect
.\" is started interactively, it prompts the user with a menu of available 
.\" actions:
.B dselect
を対話的に起動すると、
以下の利用可能アクションのメニューをユーザに提示する。
.SS access
.\" Choose and configure an access method to access package repositories.  
パッケージリポジトリにアクセスするための、アクセス方式を選択・設定する。
.sp
.\" By default, \fBdselect\fP provides several methods such 
.\" as \fIfloppy\fP, \fIharddisk\fP or \fIcdrom\fP, but other packages 
.\" may provide additional methods, eg. the \fIapt\fP access method provided 
.\" by the \fBapt\fP package or \fImulti_cd\fP by the \fBdpkg-multicd\fP
.\" package.
デフォルトでは \fBdselect\fP は \fIfloppy\fP, \fIharddisk\fP, \fIcdrom\fP
といった、いくつかの方式を提供する。
しかし、他のパッケージが追加アクセス方式を提供することもある。
例えば、\fIapt\fP アクセス方式は \fBapt\fP パッケージで提供され、
\fImulti_cd\fP は \fBdpkg-multicd\fP で提供される。
.sp
.\" The use of the \fIapt\fP access method is strongly recommended.
\fIapt\fP アクセス方式の使用を、強く推奨する。
.sp
.SS update
.\" Refresh the available packages database.
利用可能パッケージデータベースをリフレッシュする。
.sp
.\" Retrieves a list of available package versions from the package 
.\" repository, configured for the current access method, and update 
.\" the dpkg database.  The package lists are commonly provided by the 
.\" repository as files named \fBPackages\fP or \fBPackages.gz\fP.  
.\" These files can be generated by repository maintainers, using the
.\" program \fBdpkg-scanpackages(1)\fP.  
利用可能パッケージのバージョンリストを、現在設定しているアクセス方式で、
パッケージリポジトリから取得し、dpkg データベースを更新する。
パッケージリストは、一般的には \fBPackages\fP, \fBPackages.gz\fP という名前で、
リポジトリより提供されている。
リポジトリ管理者は、\fBdpkg-scanpackages(1)\fPというプログラムを使用して、
このファイルを生成することができる。
.sp
.\" Details of the update action depend on the access method's implementation.
.\" Normally the process is straightforward and requires no user interaction.
update アクションの詳細は、アクセス方式の実装に依存する。
通常、このプロセスは単純で、ユーザの入力を必要としない。
.sp
.SS select
.\" View or manage package selections and dependencies.  
パッケージの選択や依存関係の表示・管理を行う。
.sp
.\" This is the main function of \fBdselect\fP.  In the select screen, the
.\" user can review a list of all available and installed packages.  When run
.\" with administrator privileges, it is also possible to interactively
.\" change packages selection state.  \fBdselect\fP tracks the implications
.\" of these changes to other depending or conflicting packages.
これが \fBdselect\fP のメイン機能である。
選択した画面で、全利用可能・インストール済みパッケージのリストを調査できる。
管理者権限で実行すると、対話的に、
パッケージ選択状況を変更することもできる。
\fBdselect\fP は、選択状況の変更に関連して起こる
他の依存・競合パッケージについても同様に追跡する。
.sp
.\" When a conflict or failed depends is detected, a dependency resolution 
.\" subscreen is prompted to the user.  In this screen, a list of conflicting 
.\" or depending packages is shown, and for each package listed, the reason
.\" for its listing is shown.  The user may apply the suggestions proposed
.\" by \fBdselect\fP, override them, or back out all the changes, including
.\" the ones that created the unresolved depends or conflicts.
競合や依存の失敗を検出すると、依存関係解決サブ画面をユーザに提示する。
この画面では、競合パッケージや依存パッケージを、その理由とともに表示する。
ユーザは、\fBdselect\fP が提案した変更案を適用してもよいし、
その案を上書きしてもよい。また、変更をすべて元に戻してもよい。
以上を、依存・競合が解決されるまで、繰り返す。
.sp
.\" The use of the interactive package selections management screen is 
.\" explained in more detail below.
対話的なパッケージ選択管理画面の詳細な使い方を後述する。
.sp
.SS install
.\" Installs selected packages.
選択したパッケージをインストールする。
.sp
.\" The configured access method will fetch installable or upgradable packages 
.\" from the relevant repositories and install these using \fBdpkg\fP.  
.\" Depending on the implementation of the access method, all packages can
.\" be prefetched before installation, or fetched when needed.
.\" Some access methods may also remove packages that were marked for removal.
インストール・更新するパッケージを、
設定したアクセス方式で適切なリポジトリより取得し、
\fBdpkg\fP を用いてインストールを行う。
アクセス方式の実装に依存するが、インストール前に全パッケージを取得、
もしくは必要な時に取得する。
アクセス方式により、削除マークをつけたパッケージの削除を行う場合もある。
.sp
.\" If an error occurred during install, it is usually advisable to run
.\" install again.  In most cases, the problems will disappear or be solved.
.\" If problems persist or the installation performed was incorrect, please
.\" investigate into the causes and circumstances, and file a bug in the 
.\" Debian bug tracking system.  Instructions on how to do this can be found 
.\" at http://bugs.debian.org/ or by reading the documentation 
.\" for \fBbug(1)\fP or \fBreportbug(1)\fP, if these are installed.
インストール中にエラーが発生した場合、もう一度 install を行うよう促される。
その場合でも、ほとんど問題が発生しないか、解決済みとなっている。
問題が残ったままだったり、インストールが異常終了する場合、
原因・事情を調べて、Debian バグ追跡システムへバグ報告をしていただきたい。
バグ報告の方法は、http://bugs.debian.org/ や、
インストールされていれば、 \fBbug(1)\fP や \fBreportbug(1)\fP の
文書を参照のこと。
.sp
.\" Details of the install action depend on the access method's implementation.
.\" The user's attention and input may be required during installation,
.\" configuration or removal of packages.  This depends on the maintainer
.\" scripts in the package.  Some packages make use of the \fBdebconf(8)\fP
.\" library, allowing for more flexible or even automated installation
.\" setups.
install アクションの詳細はアクセス方式の実装に依存する。
パッケージのインストール、設定、削除中に、ユーザに注意を促したり、
入力を要求する可能性もある。
これはパッケージ管理者スクリプトに依存する。
パッケージによっては、\fBdebconf(8)\fP ライブラリを用いており、
より柔軟で自動化されたインストールセットアップが可能である。
.sp
.SS config
.\" Configures any previously installed, but not fully configured packages.
すでにインストール済みだが、
設定が完了していないパッケージの設定を行う。
.sp
.SS remove
.\" Removes or purges installed packages, that are marked for removal.
削除マークをつけたインストール済みパッケージの、削除・完全削除を行う。
.sp
.SS quit
.\" Quit \fBdselect\fP
\fBdselect\fP を終了する。
.sp
.\" Exits the program with zero (succesful) errorcode.
エラーコード 0 (成功) でプログラムを終了する。
.sp
.\" .SH Package selections management
.SH パッケージ選択管理
.sp
.\" .SS Introduction
.SS 入門
.sp
.B dselect 
.\" directly exposes
.\" the administrator to some of the complexities involved with managing
.\" large sets of packages with many interdependencies.  For a user who is
.\" unfamiliar with the concepts and the ways of the debian package management
.\" system, it can be quite overwhelming.  Although \fBdselect\fP is aimed
.\" at easing package management and administration, it is only instrumental
.\" in doing so and can not be assumed to be a sufficient substitute for
.\" administrator skill and understanding.  The user is required to
.\" be familiar with the concepts underlying the Debian packaging system.
.\" In case of doubt, consult the \fBdpkg(8)\fP manpage and the Debian
.\" policy manual.
大量の相互依存関係を持つパッケージ群の管理する複雑さに、管理者は直面する。
Debian パッケージ管理システムの概念や、その方法に慣れていないユーザにとっては、
これは圧倒的ですらある。
\fBdselect\fP は、パッケージ管理と管理作業の負担緩和を目指している。
しかし、単に負担緩和に役立つだけで、
管理者としての技術や知識の代用にはならない。
ユーザには、Debian パッケージングシステムについての基礎概念に
精通することが要求される。
疑問があれば、\fBdpkg(8)\fP のマニュアルや、Debian ポリシーマニュアルを
参照してほしい。
.sp
.\" Unless \fBdselect\fP is run in expert
.\" or immediate mode, a help screen is first displayed when choosing this
.\" action from the menu.  The user is \fIstrongly\fP advised to study all of
.\" the information presented in the online help screens, when one pops up.
.\" The online help screens can at any time be invoked with the \fB'?'\fP key.
\fBdselect\fP が、エキスパートモードや直接モードで起動されない場合、
メニューからアクションを選ぶ際に、初めにヘルプ画面が表示される。
オンラインヘルプ画面がポップアップした際には、
そこに示される内容をすべて検討するよう、 \fI強く\fP お奨めする。
オンラインヘルプ画面は、いつでも \fB'?'\fP キーで表示できる。
.sp
.\" .SS Screen layout
.SS 画面レイアウト
.sp
.\" The select screen is by default split in a top and a bottom half.
.\" The top half shows a list of packages.  A cursor bar can select an
.\" individual package, or a group of packages, if applicable, by selecting
.\" the group header.  The bottom half of the screen shows some details
.\" about the package currently selected in the top half of the screen.
.\" The type of detail that is displayed can be varied.
選択画面は、デフォルトで上下 2 分割されている。
上半分は、パッケージリストを表示している。
カーソルバーで個々のパッケージを選択したり、
グループヘッダを選択(できれば)して、パッケージグループを選択したりできる。
画面の下半分は、画面の上半分で現在選択しているパッケージの詳細が表示される。
表示される詳細のタイプは、変更できる。
.sp
.\" Pressing the \fB'I'\fP key toggles a full-screen display of the packages
.\" list, an enlarged view of the package details, or the equally split screen.
 \fB'I'\fP キーを押すごとに、パッケージリストの全画面表示、
パッケージ詳細の拡大、画面の均等分割を切り替える。
.sp
.\" .SS Package details view
.SS パッケージ詳細表示
.sp
.\" The package details view by default shows the extended package description
.\" for the package that is currently selected in the packages status list.
.\" The type of detail can be toggled by pressing the \fB'i'\fP key.  This
.\" alternates between:
.\"  - the extended description
.\"  - the control information for the installed version
.\"  - the control information for the available version
デフォルトのパッケージ詳細表示部は、
パッケージ状況リスト中で現在選択されているパッケージの、
長いパッケージ説明文を表示する。
詳細タイプは \fB'i'\fP キーを押すごとに以下が切り替わる。
 - 長い説明文
 - インストール済みバージョンのコントロール情報
 - 利用可能バージョンのコントロール情報
.sp
.\" In a dependency resolution screen, there is also the possibility of
.\" viewing the specific unresolved depends or conflicts related to the
.\" package and causing it to be listed.
依存関係解決画面では、特定のパッケージの未解決依存・競合関係を、
その原因とともに表示する可能性がある。
.sh
.\" .SS Packages status list
.SS パッケージ状況リスト
.sp
.\" The main select screen displays a list of all packages known to the debian
.\" package management system.  This includes packages installed on the system
.\" and packages known from the available packages database.  
メイン選択画面は、
Debian パッケージ管理システムが知っている全パッケージを表示する。
これには、システムにインストール済みのパッケージと、
利用可能パッケージデータベースが知っているパッケージが含まれる。
.sp
.\" For every package, the list shows the package's status, priority,
.\" section, installed and available versions, the package name and its
.\" short description, all in one line.  By pressing the \fB'V'\fP key,
.\" the display of the installed and available version can be toggled between
.\" on an off.  By pressing the \fB'v'\fP key,
.\" the package status display is toggled between verbose and shorthand.
.\" Shorthand display is the default.
リストにはパッケージごとに、パッケージの状況、優先度、セクション、
インストール済み・利用可能バージョン、パッケージ名、短い説明文が
1 行で表示される。
\fB'V'\fP キーを押すと、インストール済みバージョンと利用可能バージョンの
表示を ON/OFF できる。
\fB'v'\fP キーを押すと、パッケージ状況を詳細表示と簡略表示で切り替える。
簡略表示がデフォルトである。
.sp
.\" The shorthand status indication consists
.\" of four parts:  an error flag, which should normally be clear, the
.\" current status, the last selection state and the current selection state.
.\" The first two relate to the actual state of the package, the second pair
.\" are about the selections set by the user.
状況簡略表示は、以下の 4 パートに分かれている。
エラーフラグ (通常クリア)、現在の状況、前回選択状況、今回選択状況である。
始めの 2 つはパッケージの現在の状況を表し、
その後の 2 つはユーザがセットした選択状況を表している。
.sp
.\" These are the meanings of the shorthand package status indicator codes:
パッケージ状況簡略表示部のコードには以下の意味がある。
.\"  Error flag: 
.\"   \fIempty\fP   no error
.\"   \fBR\fP       serious error, needs reinstallation;
.\"  Installed state:   
.\"   \fIempty\fP   not installed;
.\"   \fB*\fP       fully installed and configured;
.\"   \fB-\fP       not installed but some config files may remain;
.\"   \fBU\fP       unpacked but not yet configured;
.\"   \fBC\fP       half-configured (an error happened);
.\"   \fBI\fP       half-installed (an error happened).
.\"  Current and requested selections:
.\"   \fB*\fP       marked for installation or upgrade;
.\"   \fB-\fP       marked for removal, configuration files remain;
.\"   \fB=\fP       on hold: package will not be processed at all;
.\"   \fB_\fP       marked for purge, also remove configuration;
.\"   \fBn\fP       package is new and has yet to be marked.
 エラーフラグ:
  \fI空\fP      エラーなし
  \fBR\fP       深刻なエラー (要再インストール)
 インストール状況:   
  \fI空\fP      未インストール
  \fB*\fP       インストール済み、かつ設定済み
  \fB-\fP       未インストールだが、設定ファイルが残っている
  \fBU\fP       展開済みだが設定が済んでいない
  \fBC\fP       半設定状況 (エラー発生)
  \fBI\fP       半インストール状況 (エラー発生)
 現在の選択・要求した選択:
  \fB*\fP       インストール・更新マーク
  \fB-\fP       削除マーク (設定ファイルは残す)
  \fB=\fP       保留 (パッケージになにも処理を行わない)
  \fB_\fP       完全削除マーク (設定ファイルも削除する)
  \fBn\fP       新規パッケージでまだマーク付けされていない
.sp
.\" .SS Cursor and screen movement
.SS カーソルおよび画面移動
.sp
.\" The package selection list and the dependency conflict
.\" resolution screens can be navigated using motion
.\" commands mapped to the following keys:
パッケージ選択リストや依存・競合関係解決画面では、
以下のキー割当のコマンドで操作できる。
.br
.\"   \fBp, Up, k\fP           move cursor bar up
.\"   \fBn, Down, j\fP         move cursor bar down  
.\"   \fBP, Pgup, Backspace\fP scroll list 1 page up
.\"   \fBN, Pgdn, Space\fP     scroll list 1 page down
.\"   \fB^p\fP                 scroll list 1 line up
.\"   \fB^n\fP                 scroll list 1 line down
.\"   \fBt, Home\fP            jump to top of list
.\"   \fBe, End\fP             jump to end of list
.\"   \fBu\fP                  scroll info 1 page up
.\"   \fBd\fP                  scroll info 1 page down
.\"   \fB^u\fP                 scroll info 1 line up
.\"   \fB^d\fP                 scroll info 1 line down
.\"   \fBB, Left-arrow\fP      pan display 1/3 screen left
.\"   \fBF, Right-arrow\fP     pan display 1/3 screen right
.\"   \fB^b\fP                 pan display 1 character left
.\"   \fB^f\fP                 pan display 1 character right
  \fBp, Up, k\fP           カーソルバーを上に移動
  \fBn, Down, j\fP         カーソルバーを下に移動
  \fBP, Pgup, Backspace\fP リストを 1 ページ上にスクロール
  \fBN, Pgdn, Space\fP     リストを 1 ページ下にスクロール
  \fB^p\fP                 リストを 1 行上にスクロール
  \fB^n\fP                 リストを 1 行下にスクロール
  \fBt, Home\fP            リストの先頭にジャンプ
  \fBe, End\fP             リストの最後にジャンプ
  \fBu\fP                  情報を 1 ページ上にスクロール
  \fBd\fP                  情報を 1 ページ下にスクロール
  \fB^u\fP                 情報を 1 行上にスクロール
  \fB^d\fP                 情報を 1 行下にスクロール
  \fBB, Left-arrow\fP      表示を 1/3 画面左にスクロール
  \fBF, Right-arrow\fP     表示を 1/3 画面右にスクロール
  \fB^b\fP                 表示を 1 文字左にスクロール
  \fB^f\fP                 表示を 1 文字右にスクロール
.sp
.\" .SS Searching and sorting
.SS 検索と並べ替え
.sp
.\" The list of packages can be searched by package name.  This
.\" is done by pressing \fB'/'\fP, and typing a simple search
.\" string. The string is interpreted as a
.\" .BR regex (7)
.\" regular expression.
.\" If you add \fB'/d'\fP to the search expression, dselect will also search
.\" in descriptions. If you add \fB'/i'\fP the search will be case insensitive.
.\" You may combine these two suffixes like this: \fB'/id'\fP.
.\" Repeated searching is accomplished by repeatedly pressing
.\" the \fB'n'\fP or \fB'\\'\fP keys, until the wanted package is found.
.\" If the search reaches the bottom of the list, it wraps to the top
.\" and continues searching from there.
パッケージのリストでは、 \fB'/'\fP を押してから、
単純な検索文字列を入力することで、パッケージ名の検索ができる。
この文字列は、正規表現
.BR regex (7)
で解析される。
検索文字列に続けて \fB'/d'\fP を加えると、説明文からも検索する。
\fB'/i'\fP を加えた場合は、大文字小文字の区別をしない。
この 2 つの添字を \fB'/id'\fP のようにつなげても記述できる。
検索結果に対して、続けて \fB'n'\fP ないし \fB'\\'\fP キーを押すと、
目的のパッケージが得られるまで、検索を繰り返せる。
検索がリストの最後まで達すると、先頭に戻る。
.sp
.\" The list sort order can be varied by pressing 
.\" the \fB'o'\fP and \fB'O'\fP keys repeatedly.
.\" The following nine sort orderings can be selected:
.\"  alphabet          available           status
.\"  priority+section  available+priority  status+priority
.\"  section+priority  available+section   status+section
リストのソート順を変えるには、\fB'o'\fP と \fB'O'\fP キーを使用する。
以下の 9 通りのソート順を選べる。
 アルファベット	    利用可能             状況
 優先度+セクション  利用可能+優先度      状況+優先度
 セクション+優先度  利用可能+セクション  状況+セクション
.br
.\" Where not listed above explicitly, alphabetic order is used as 
.\" the final subordering sort key.
上記リストには明記していないが、
最後にアルファベット順でソートされる。
.sp
.\" .SS Altering selections
.SS 選択の変更
.sp
.\" The requested selection state of individual packages may be 
.\" altered with the following commands:
それぞれのパッケージの要求選択状況は、以下のコマンドで変更できる。
.\"   \fB+, Insert\fP    install or upgrade
.\"   \fB=, H\fP         hold in present state and version
.\"   \fB:, G\fP         unhold: upgrade or leave uninstalled
.\"   \fB-, Delete\fP    remove, but leave configuration
.\"   \fB_\fP            remove & purge configuration
  \fB+, Insert\fP    インストール・更新する
  \fB=, H\fP         現在の状況・バージョンを保留する
  \fB:, G\fP         保留解除 (更新ないし未インストールのままとする)
  \fB-, Delete\fP    削除して設定は残す
  \fB_\fP            削除して設定も消す
.sp
.\" When the change request results in one or more unsatisfied depends
.\" or conflicts, \fBdselect\fP prompts the user with a dependency resolution 
.\" screen.  This will be further explained below.
変更要求の結果、依存を満足しなかったり競合した場合、
\fBdselect\fP 依存関係解決画面を提示する。
これは後ほど説明する。
.sp
.\" It is also possible to apply these commands to groups of package
.\" selections, by pointing the cursor bar onto a group header.  The
.\" exact grouping of packages is dependent on the current list ordering
.\" settings.  
さらに、グループヘッダ上にカーソルバーを移動して、
パッケージ選択のグループにコマンドを適用することができる。
パッケージの正確なグループ化ができるかは、
現在のリストのソート順設定に依存する。
.sp
.\" Proper care should be taken when altering large groups of selections,
.\" because this can instantaneously create large numbers of unresolved 
.\" depends or conflicts, all of which will be listed in one dependency
.\" resolution screen, making them very hard to handle.  In practice, 
.\" only hold and unhold operations are useful when applied to groups.
一度に大量の未解決依存・競合を発生させるため、
中身が大きいグループを変更する場合は、十分注意するべきである。
1 つの依存関係解決画面に、すべて表示されることとなるため、
これを解決するのは非常に難しい。
実際には、グループの変更が有用なのは、保留や保留解除の時ぐらいである。
.sp
.\" .SS Resolving depends and conflicts
.SS 依存・競合解決
.sp
.\" When the change request results in one or more unsatisfied depends
.\" or conflicts, \fBdselect\fP prompts the user with a dependency resolution 
.\" screen.  First however, an informative help screen is displayed. 
選択状況を変更して未解決依存・競合が発生した場合、
\fBdselect\fP は依存関係解決画面を表示する。
初めての場合は、その前にヘルプ画面を表示する。
.sp
.\" The top half of this screen lists all the packages that will have 
.\" unresolved depends or conflicts, as a result of the requested change, 
.\" and all the packages whose installation can resolve any of these 
.\" depends or whose removal can resolve any of the conflicts.
.\" The bottom half defaults to show the depends or conflicts that
.\" cause the currently selected package to be listed.
この画面の上半分には、未解決依存・競合があるパッケージや、
要求された変更の結果、
そして依存を解決するのにインストールすればいいパッケージ、
競合を解決するのに削除すればいいパッケージをすべて表示する。
下半分には、現在選択しているパッケージの依存や競合の原因を、
デフォルトで表示する。
.sp
.\" When the sublist of packages is displayed initially, \fBdselect\fP
.\" may have already set the requested selection status of some of the
.\" listed packages, in order to resolve the depends of conflicts that
.\" caused the dependency resolution screen to be displayed.  Usually,
.\" it is best to follow up the suggestions made by \fBdselect\fP.
パッケージのサブリストが初期表示されたとき、
\fBdselect\fP は、依存関係解決画面が表示されるときに依存や競合を解決するよう、
リストしたパッケージの選択状況をすでに変更しているかもしれない。
通常、\fBdselect\fP による提案を採用するのが最良である。
.\" 訳注 "depends of conflicts" は "depends or conflicts" の typo として訳した
.sp
.\" The listed packages' selection state may be reverted to the original
.\" settings, as they were before the unresolved depends or conflicts
.\" were created , by pressing the \fB'R'\fP key.  By pressing the \fB'D'\fP
.\" key, the automatic suggestions are reset, but the change that caused
.\" the dependency resolution screen to be prompted is kept as requested.
.\" Finally, by pressing \fB'U'\fP, the selections are again set to the 
.\" automatic suggestion values.
\fB'R'\fP キーを押すことで、未解決依存・競合が作成されたときのように、
リストしたパッケージの選択状況を元に戻せるだろう。
\fB'D'\fP キーを押すことで、自動提案はリセットされるが、
依存関係解決画面が示した変更は、要求したものと同様に維持される。
最終的に \fB'U'\fP を押すことで、自動提案をセットすることができる。
.sp
.\" .SS Establishing the requested selections
.SS 選択要求の確定
.sp
.\" By pressing \fBenter\fP, the currently displayed set of selections
.\" is accepted.  If \fBdselect\fP detects no unresolved depends as a result 
.\" of the requested selections, the new selections will be set.
.\" However, if there are any unresolveded depends, \fBdselect\fP will again 
.\" prompt the user with a dependency resolution screen.
\fBenter\fP を押すと、現在表示されている選択セットで確定する。
選択要求の結果、未解決依存が検出されなければ、
\fBdselect\fP は新しい選択を設定する。
しかし、いまだ未解決依存が存在する場合、
\fBdselect\fP は依存関係解決画面を改めて表示する。
.sp
.\" To alter a set of selections that creates unresolved depends or 
.\" conflicts and forcing \fBdselect\fP to accept it, press the \fB'Q'\fP
.\" key.  This sets the selections as specified by the user, 
.\" unconditionally.  Generally, don't do this unless you've read 
.\" the fine print.
未解決依存・競合存在する選択状況で、\fBdselect\fP 確定を強制するには、
\fB'Q'\fPキーを押す。
これはユーザが指定した選択を無条件にセットする。
一般的に、詳細を読んでいなければ、これをしないこと。
.sp
.\" The opposite effect, to back out any selections change requests and 
.\" go back to the previous list of selections, is attained by pressing 
.\" the \fB'X'\fP or \fBescape\fP keys.  By repeatedly pressing these 
.\" keys, any possibly detrimental changes to the requested package 
.\" selections can be backed out completely to the last established 
.\" settings.
反対に、選択を取り消して選択リストを元に戻す場合は、
\fB'X'\fP キーや \fBescape\fP キーを押すこと。
繰り返しキーを押すことで、問題のある変更要求を取り消し、
最後に確定した選択に戻すことができる。
.sp
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" The
.\" .B dselect
.\" package selection interface is confusing to some new users.
.\" Reportedly, it even makes seasoned kernel developers cry.
.B dselect
パッケージ選択インターフェースは、新しいユーザを混乱させる。
聞くところでは、経験を積んだカーネル開発者ですら、これを嘆いている。
.sp
.\" The documentation is lacking.
文書が足りない。
.sp
.\" There is no help option in the main menu.
メインメニューにヘルプオプションがない。
.sp
.\" The visible list of available packages cannot be reduced.
利用可能パッケージのリスト表示を減らせない。
.sp
.\" The built in access methods can no longer stand up to current quality
.\" standards.  Use the access method provided by apt, it is not only not
.\" broken, it is also much more flexible than the built in access methods.
内蔵アクセス方式では、もはや現在の品質基準を満たせない。
apt が提供するアクセス方式を利用すれば、壊れないだけでなく、
内蔵アクセス方式より遙かに柔軟である。
.\" .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.BR dpkg (8),
.BR apt-get (8),
.BR sources.list (5),
.BR deb (5),
.\" the Debian policy manual.
Debian ポリシーマニュアル
.\" .SH AUTHORS
.SH 著者
.B dselect
.\" was written by Ian Jackson (ijackson@gnu.ai.mit.edu). Full list of
.\" contributors may be found in `dselect --license'.
は、Ian Jackson (ijackson@gnu.ai.mit.edu) によって書かれた。
このプログラムへの全貢献者一覧は `dselect --license' で参照できる。
.br
.\" This manual page was written by Juho Vuori <javuori@cc.helsinki.fi>,
.\" Josip Rodin and Joost kooij.
このマニュアルは Juho Vuori <javuori@cc.helsinki.fi> によって書かれ、
Josip Rodin, Joost kooij が更新した。
.SH 翻訳者
関戸 幸一 <sekido@mbox.kyoto-inet.or.jp>
.br
鍋谷 栄展 <nabe@debian.or.jp>
.br
倉澤 望 <nabetaro@debian.or.jp>
