.TH dpkg\-divert 8 "2006-02-28" "Debian Project" "dpkg utilities"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-divert - override a package's version of a file
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-divert
.RI [ options ]
.RB [ \-\-add ]
.I <file>
.br
.B dpkg\-divert
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-remove
.I <file>
.br
.B dpkg\-divert
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-list
.I <glob-pattern>
.br
.B dpkg\-divert
.RI [ options ]
.B \-\-truename
.I <file>
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
File `diversions' are a way of forcing dpkg not to install a file into its
location, but to a `diverted' location. Diversions can be used through the
Debian package scripts to move a file away when it causes a conflict. System
administrators can also use it to override some package's configuration
file, or whenever some files (which aren't marked as 'conffiles') need to be
preserved by dpkg, when installing a newer version of a package which
contains those files.
.sp
.B dpkg\-divert
is the utility used to set up and update the list of diversions. It
functions in three basic modes - adding, removing, and listing diversions.
The options are \fB\-\-add\fP, \fB\-\-remove\fP, and \fB\-\-list\fP,
respectively. Additionally, it can print out the real name for a diverted
file with \fB\-\-truename\fP. Other options (listed below) may also be
specified.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-admindir " <directory>"
Set the dpkg data directory to \fI<directory>\fP (default: \fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP).
.TP
.BI \-\-divert " <divert-to>"
\fI<divert-to>\fP is the name used by other packages' versions.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Output the version and the short usage instructions, and exit successfully.
.TP
.B \-\-local
Specifies that all packages' versions are diverted.
.TP
.BI \-\-package " <package>"
\fI<package>\fP is the name of a package whose copy of \fI<file>\fP will not
be diverted.
.TP
.B \-\-quiet
Quiet mode, i.e. no verbose output.
.TP
.B \-\-rename
Actually move the file aside (or back). dpkg\-divert will abort operation
in case the destination file already exists.
.TP
.B \-\-test
Test mode, i.e. don't actually perform any changes, just demonstrate.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Output program name and version and exit successfully.
.
.SH NOTES
When adding, default is \fB\-\-local\fP and \fB\-\-divert\fP
\fI<original>.distrib\fP. When removing, \fB\-\-package\fP or \fB\-\-local\fP
and \fB\-\-divert\fP must match if specified.

Directories can't be diverted with \fBdpkg\-divert\fP.

Care should be taken when diverting shared libraries, \fBldconfig\fP (8)
creates a symbolic link based on the DT_SONAME field embedded in the library.
Because ldconfig doesn't honour diverts (only dpkg does), if a diverted
library has the same SONAME as the undiverted one the symlink may end up
pointing at the diverted library.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
To divert all copies of a \fI/usr/bin/example.foo\fR to \fI/usr/bin/example\fR,
performing the rename if required:
.HP
dpkg-divert --divert /usr/bin/example --rename /usr/bin/example.foo
.PP
To remove that diversion:
.HP
dpkg-divert --rename --remove /usr/bin/example.foo

.PP
To divert any package trying to install \fI/usr/bin/example\fR to
\fI/usr/bin/example.foo\fR, except your own \fIwibble\fR package:
.HP
dpkg-divert --package wibble --divert /usr/bin/example.foo --rename /usr/bin/example
.PP
To remove that diversion:
.HP
dpkg-divert --package wibble --rename --remove /usr/bin/example
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/dpkg/diversions
File which contains the current list of diversions of the system. It is
located in the dpkg administration directory, along with other files
important to dpkg, such as `status' or `available'.
.br
Note: \fBdpkg\-divert\fP preserves the old copy of this file, with extension
"\-old", before replacing it with the new one.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg (1).
.SH AUTHOR
Copyright (C) 1995 Ian Jackson.
.sp
This is free software; see the GNU General Public Licence
version 2 or later for copying conditions. There is NO warranty.
