.TH dpkg\-query 1 "2006-01-26" "Debian Project" "dpkg suite"
.SH NAME
dpkg\-query \- a tool to query the dpkg database

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dpkg\-query

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBdpkg\-query\fP is a tool to show information about packages listed in
the \fBdpkg\fP database.


.SH COMMANDS
.TP
\fB\-l\fP | \fB\-\-list\fP \fIpackage-name-pattern\fP ...
List packages matching given pattern. If no \fIpackage-name-pattern\fP
is given, list all packages in \fI/var/lib/dpkg/status\fP.  Normal
shell wildchars are allowed in \fIpackage-name-pattern\fP. Please note
you will probably have to quote \fIpackage-name-pattern\fP to prevent
the shell from performing filename expansion. For example this will
list all package names starting with \*(lqlibc6\*(rq:

.T
.nf
  \fBdpkg\-query \-l 'libc6*'\fP
.fi

The output format of this option is not configurable, but varies
automatically to fit the terminal width. It is intended for human
readers, and is not easily machine-readable. See \fB\-W\fP (\fB\-\-show\fP)
and \fB\-\-showformat\fP for a way to configure the output format.
.TP
\fB\-W\fP | \fB\-\-show\fP \fIpackage-name-pattern\fP ...
Just like the \fB\-\-list\fP option this will list all packages matching
the given pattern. However the output can be customized using the
\fB\-\-showformat\fP option.
The default output format gives one line per matching package, each line
having the name and installed version of the package, separated by a tab.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP | \fB\-\-status\fP \fIpackage-name\fP ...
Report status of specified package. This just displays the entry in
the installed package status database.
.TP
\fB\-L\fP | \fB\-\-listfiles\fP \fIpackage\fP ...
List files installed to your system from \fBpackage\fP.
However, note that files created by package-specific
installation-scripts are not listed.
.TP
\fB\-S\fP | \fB\-\-search\fP \fIfilename-search-pattern\fP ...
Search for a filename from installed packages. All standard shell
wildchars can be used in the pattern.  This command will not list
extra files created by maintainer scripts, nor will it list
alternatives.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP |\fB\-\-print\-avail\fP package
Display details about \fIpackage\fP, as found in
\fI/var/lib/dpkg/available\fP.
.TP
\fB\-\-licence\fP | \fB\-\-license\fP
Display licence and copyright information.
.TP
\fB\-\-version\fP
Display version information.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-\-admindir=\fIdir\fP
Change the location of the \fBdpkg\fR database. The default location is
\fI/var/lib/dpkg\fP.
.TP
\fB-f\fP | \fB\-\-showformat=\fP\fIformat\fR
This option is used to specify the format of the output \fB\-\-show\fP
will produce.  The format is a string that will be output for each package
listed.

In the format string, \(lq\fB\e\fP\(rq introduces escapes:

.T
.nf
    \fB\en\fP  newline
    \fB\er\fP  carriage return
    \fB\et\fP  tab
.fi

\(lq\fB\e\fP\(rq before any other character suppresses any special
meaning of the following character, which is useful for \(lq\fB\e\fP\(rq
and \(lq\fB$\fP\(rq.

Package information can be included by inserting
variable references to package fields using the syntax
\(lq\fB${\fP\fIfield\fR[\fB;\fP\fIwidth\fR]\fB}\fP\(rq. Fields are
printed right-aligned unless the width is negative in which case left
alignment will be used. The following \fIfield\fRs are recognised:

.T
.nf
    \fBArchitecture\fP
    \fBBugs\fP
    \fBConffiles\fP
    \fBConfig\-Version\fP
    \fBConflicts\fP
    \fBDepends\fP
    \fBDescription\fP
    \fBEnhances\fP
    \fBEssential\fP
    \fBFilename\fP
    \fBInstalled\-Size\fP
    \fBMD5sum\fP
    \fBMSDOS\-Filename\fP
    \fBMaintainer\fP
    \fBOrigin\fP
    \fBPackage\fP
    \fBPre\-Depends\fP
    \fBPriority\fP
    \fBProvides\fP
    \fBRecommends\fP
    \fBReplaces\fP
    \fBRevision\fP
    \fBSection\fP
    \fBSize\fP
    \fBSource\fP
    \fBStatus\fP
    \fBSuggests\fP
    \fBVersion\fP
.fi

The default format string is \(lq\fB${Package}\et${Version}\en\fP\(rq.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBCOLUMNS\fP
This setting influences the output of the \fB\-\-list\fP option by changing
the width of its output.

.SH AUTHOR
Copyright 2001 Wichert Akkerman
.UR mailto:wakkerma@debian.org
<wakkerma@debian.org>
.UE
.sp
This is free software; see the GNU General Public Licence version 2 or
later for copying conditions.  There is NO warranty.


.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dpkg (1)

