.TH DPKG-ARCHITECTURE 1 "2006-01-23" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.SH "NAME"
dpkg\-architecture \- set and determine the architecture for package building
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.IX Header "SYNOPSIS"
dpkg-architecture [options] [action]
.PP
Valid options:
\&\fB\-a\fRDebian-Architecture
\&\fB\-t\fRGnu-System-Type
\&\fB\-f\fR
.PP
Valid actions:
\&\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-e\fRDebian\-Architecture, \fB\-i\fRArchitecture\-Alias,
\fB\-q\fRVariable\-Name, \fB\-s\fR, \fB\-u\fR, \fB\-c\fR Command, \fB\-L\fR
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.IX Header "DESCRIPTION"
dpkg-architecture does provide a facility to determine and set the build and
host architecture for package building.
.SH "OVERVIEW"
.IX Header "OVERVIEW"
The build architecture is always determined by an external call to dpkg, and
can not be set at the command line.
.PP
You can specify the host architecture by providing one or both of the options \fB\-a\fR
and \fB\-t\fR. The default is determined by an external call to gcc, or the same as
the build architecture if \s-1CC\s0 or gcc are both not available. One out of \fB\-a\fR and \fB\-t\fR
is sufficient, the value of the other will be set to a usable default.
Indeed, it is often better to only specify one, because dpkg-architecture
will warn you if your choice doesn't match the default.
.PP
The default action is \fB\-l\fR, which prints the environment variables, one each line,
in the format VARIABLE=value. If you want to check for equality between two
Debian Architectures, you can use \fB\-e\fR, by default it will compare against
the currect Debian Architecture, being it the host. If you want to check for
identity of the current Debian Architecture against an Architecture Alias, you
can use \fB\-i\fR. If you are only interested in the value of a single variable,
you can use \fB\-q\fR. If you specify \fB\-s\fR, it will output an export
command. This can be used to set the environment variables using eval. \fB\-u\fR
does return a similar command to unset all variables. \fB\-c\fR does execute a
command in an environment which has all variables set to the determined
value.
.PP
A list of valid architecture names can be printed with the \fB\-L\fR action.
.PP
Existing environment variables with the same name as used by the scripts are
not overwritten, except if the \fB\-f\fR force flag is present. This allows the user
to override a value even when the call to dpkg-architecture is buried in
some other script (for example dpkg\-buildpackage).
.SH "TERMS"
.IX Header "TERMS"
.IP "build machine" 4
.IX Item "build machine"
The machine the package is built on.
.IP "host machine" 4
.IX Item "host machine"
The machine the package is built for.
.IP "Debian Architecture" 4
.IX Item "Debian Architecture"
The Debian architecture string, which specifies the binary tree in the \s-1FTP\s0
archive. Examples: i386, sparc, hurd\-i386.
.IP "Architecture Alias" 4
.IX Item "Architecture Alias"
An architecture alias is a wildcard architecture that will match any real
architecture being part of it. The general form is <kernel>\-<cpu>.
Examples: linux\-any, linux\-alpha, any\-i386, hurd\-any.
.IP "\s-1GNU\s0 System Type" 4
.IX Item "GNU System Type"
An architecture specification string consisting of two parts,
cpu-system.  Examples: i386\-linux-gnu, sparc\-linux-gnu, i386\-gnu,
x86_64-netbsd.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.IX Header "EXAMPLES"
dpkg-buildpackage accepts the \fB\-a\fR option and passes it to dpkg\-architecture.
Other examples:
.PP
CC=i386\-gnu\-gcc dpkg-architecture \f(CW\*(C`\-c\*(C'\fR debian/rules build
.PP
eval `dpkg\-architecture \f(CW\*(C`\-u\*(C'\fR`
.SH "VARIABLES"
.IX Header "VARIABLES"
The following variables are set by dpkg\-architecture:
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_ARCH"
The Debian architecture of the build machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH_OS\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_ARCH_OS"
The Debian system name of the build machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH_CPU\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_ARCH_CPU"
The Debian cpu name of the build machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE"
The \s-1GNU\s0 system type of the build machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_CPU\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_GNU_CPU"
The \s-1CPU\s0 part of \s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0
.IP "\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM"
The System part of \s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_ARCH"
The Debian architecture of the host machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS"
The Debian system name of the host machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU"
The Debian cpu name of the host machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE"
The \s-1GNU\s0 system type of the host machine.
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_CPU\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_GNU_CPU"
The \s-1CPU\s0 part of \s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0
.IP "\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_SYSTEM\s0" 4
.IX Item "DEB_HOST_GNU_SYSTEM"
The System part of \s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0
.SH "DEBIAN/RULES"
.IX Header "DEBIAN/RULES"
The environment variables set by dpkg-architecture are passed to
debian/rules as make variables (see make documentation).  However, you
should not rely on them, as this breaks manual invocation of the
script.  Instead, you should always initialize them using
dpkg-architecture with the \-q option.  Here are some examples, which
also show how you can improve the cross compilation support in your
package:
.PP

Instead of:
.IP
.nf
ARCH=`dpkg \-\-print\-architecture`
configure $(\s-1ARCH\s0)\-linux
.fi
.PP
please use the following:
.IP
.nf
\&\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0 := $(shell dpkg-architecture \-qDEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE)
\&\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0 := $(shell dpkg-architecture \-qDEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE)

configure \-\-build=$(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0) \-\-host=$(\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0)
.fi
.PP

Instead of:
.IP
.nf
ARCH=`dpkg \-\-print\-architecture`
ifeq ($(\s-1ARCH\s0),alpha)
  ...
endif
.fi
.PP
please use:
.IP
.nf
\&\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH\s0 := $(shell dpkg-architecture \-qDEB_HOST_ARCH)

ifeq ($(\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH\s0),alpha)
  ...
endif
.fi
.PP
or if you only need to check the CPU or OS type, use the DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU
or DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS variables.
.PP
In general, calling dpkg in the rules file to get architecture information
is deprecated (until you want to provide backward compatibility, see below).
Especially the \-\-print\-architecture option is unreliable since we have
Debian architectures which don't equal a processor name.

.SH "BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY"
.IX Header "BACKWARD COMPATIBILITY"
The DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU and DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS variables were only introduced
in relatively recent versions of \fIdpkg-architecture\fR (since dpkg 1.13.2),
before this \fIdebian/rules\fR files tended to check the values of the
DEB_HOST_GNU_CPU or DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE variables which have been subject
to change.
.PP
Where \fIdebian/rules\fR files check these variables to decide how or what
to compile, this should be updated to use the new variables and values.
You may wish to retain backwards compatibility with older version of
dpkg-dev by using the following code:
.IP
.nf
DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU := $(shell dpkg-architecture -qDEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU 2>/dev/null)
DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS := $(shell dpkg-architecture -qDEB_HOST_ARCH_OS 2>/dev/null)

# Take account of old dpkg-architecture output.
ifeq ($(DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU),)
  DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU := $(shell dpkg-architecture -qDEB_HOST_GNU_CPU)
  ifeq ($(DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU),x86_64)
    DEB_HOST_ARCH_CPU := amd64
  endif
endif
ifeq ($(DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS),)
  DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS := $(subst -gnu,,$(shell dpkg-architecture -qDEB_HOST_GNU_SYSTEM))
  ifeq ($(DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS),gnu)
    DEB_HOST_ARCH_OS := hurd
  endif
endif
.fi
.PP
And similarly for DEB_BUILD_ARCH_CPU and DEB_BUILD_ARCH_OS.
.PP
If you still wish to support versions of dpkg-dev that did not include
\fIdpkg-architecture\fR, the following does the job:
.IP
.nf
\&\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH\s0 := $(shell dpkg \-\-print\-architecture)
\&\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_CPU\s0 := $(patsubst hurd\-%,%,$(\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH\s0))
ifeq ($(filter\-out hurd\-%,$(\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH\s0)),)
  \s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM\s0 := gnu
else
  \s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM\s0 := linux-gnu
endif
DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE=$(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_CPU\s0)\-$(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM\s0)

\&\s-1DEB_HOST_ARCH\s0 := $(\s-1DEB_BUILD_ARCH\s0)
\&\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_CPU\s0 := $(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_CPU\s0)
\&\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_SYSTEM\s0 := $(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_SYSTEM\s0)
\&\s-1DEB_HOST_GNU_TYPE\s0 := $(\s-1DEB_BUILD_GNU_TYPE\s0)
.fi
.PP
Put a subset of these lines at the top of your debian/rules file; these
default values will be overwritten if dpkg-architecture is used.
.PP
You don't need the full set. Choose a consistent set which contains the
values you use in the rules file. For example, if you only need the host
Debian architecture, `DEB_HOST_ARCH=`dpkg \-\-print\-architecture`
is sufficient (this is indeed the Debian architecture of the build machine,
but remember that we are only trying to be backward compatible with native
compilation).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IX Header "SEE ALSO"
dpkg-buildpackage
dpkg-cross
.SH "CONTACT"
.IX Header "CONTACT"
If you have questions about the usage of the make variables in your rules
files, or about cross compilation support in your packages, please email me.
The address is Marcus Brinkmann <brinkmd@debian.org>.
