.\" Japanese Version Copyright (c) 1998 Koichi Sekido
.\"         all rights reserved.
.\" Translated Tue Aug  4 15:27:29 JST 1998
.\"         by Koichi Sekido <sekido@mbox.kyoto-inet.or.jp>
.\"
.\" WORD:       parameter               引数
.\" WORD:       user interface          ユーザインタフェース
.\" WORD:       anonymous FTP           匿名 FTP
.\"
.TH DSELECT 8 "29th November 1995" "Debian Project" "Debian GNU/Linux"
.\" .SH NAME
.SH 名前
.\" dselect \- a user tool to manage Debian GNU/Linux packages
dselect \- Debian GNU/Linux のパッケージを管理するユーザツール
.\" .SH SYNOPSIS
.SH 書式
.\" .B dselect
.\" [options]
.\" .br
.\" .B dselect
.\" [options] action ...
.B dselect
[オプション]
.br
.B dselect
[オプション] アクション ...
.\" .SH DESCRIPTION
.SH 説明
.\" .B dselect
.\" is the primary user interface for installing, removing and managing
.\" Debian GNU/Linux packages. It is an front-end to
.\" .B dpkg(8).
.\" Normally
.\" .B dselect
.\" is invoked without parameters, but some commandline parameters are still
.\" available.
.B dselect
は Debian GNU/Linux のパッケージをインストールしたり削除したり管理したり
するための代表的なユーザインタフェースである。dselect は
.B dpkg(8)
のフロントエンドである。通常
.B dselect
は引数なしで起動されるが、指定可能なコマンドライン引数もある。

.\" The usage of
.\" .B dselect
.\" is pretty self-explanatory, and also an internal help-system is
.\" included, which describes the keystrokes and some general concepts.
.\" .I Read the help.
.B dselect
の使い方は進めながら説明されるようになっている。キー操作と概要を示すヘル
プも含まれている。
.I ヘルプを読まれたい。
.\" .SS ACTIONS
.SS アクション
.TP
.B access, update, select, install, config, remove
.\" These actions automatically selects corresponding commands from the main
.\" menu, without even showing the main menu to you.
これらのアクションは、それぞれに見合ったコマンドをメインメニューから自動
的に選択する。メインメニューは表示されない。
.TP
.B quit
.\" Do nothing but quit.
何もせずに終了する。
.TP
.B menu
.\" Displays the default menu. This is equivalent to starting
.\" .B dselect
.\" with no parameters.
デフォルトのメニューを表示する。これは
.B dselect
を引数なしで起動するのと同じことである。
.\" .SS OPTIONS
.SS オプション
.TP
.\" .B --admindir <directory>
.B --admindir <ディレクトリ>
.\" Changes the directory where datafiles are located. This defaults to
.\" .I /var/lib/dpkg.
.\" Note, that these files are just some internal datafiles, actual Debian
.\" packages doesn't have to be located here.
データファイルが位置するディレクトリを変える。デフォルトは
.I /var/lib/dpkg
である。これらのファイルは内部で使用されるデータファイルであり、実際の 
Debian パッケージをここに置く必要はないことに注意されたい。
.TP
.\" .B --debug <file> | -D<file>
.B --debug <ファイル> | -D<ファイル>
.\" Turn on debugging. Debugging information is sent to
.\" .I <file>.
デバッギングを有効にする。デバッグ情報は
.I <ファイル>
に送られる。
.TP
.B --help
.\" Print a brief help text.
簡単なヘルプを表示する。
.TP
.B --licence
.\" Print the licence of
.\" .B dselect.
.B dselect
のライセンスを表示する。
.TP
.B --version
.\" Print version information.
バージョン情報を表示する。
.\" .SH BUGS
.SH バグ
.\" This manpage doesn't document the options quite correctly, and has
.\" formatting inconsistent with other manpages.
このマニュアルページは必ずしもオプションを正確に記述していない。また他の
マニュアルページとの間でフォーマットに矛盾がある。

.\" The
.\" .B dselect
.\" package selection interface is confusing or even alarming to the new
.\" user.
.B dselect
パッケージ選択のインタフェースは混乱を招きやすく、新しいユーザを不安にさ
せることすらある。

.\" There is no easy way automatically to download and install packages
.\" via anonymous FTP.
.\" （訳出せず）
.\" .SH SEE ALSO
.SH 関連項目
.B deb(5)
,
.B dpkg-deb(8)
,
.B dpkg(8)
.\"and
,
.B deb-control(5)

.\" .SH AUTHOR
.SH 著者
.\" .B dselect
.\" was written by Ian Jackson (ijackson@gnu.ai.mit.edu).
.\" This manual page is by Juho Vuori (javuori@cc.helsinki.fi).
.B dselect
は Ian Jackson (ijackson@gnu.ai.mit.edu) によって書かれた。このマニュア
ルページは Juho Vuori (javuori@cc.helsinki.fi) の手による。

.SH 翻訳者
関戸 幸一 <sekido@mbox.kyoto-inet.or.jp>

.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" comment-start: "\.\\\" "
.\" End:
